THE PROLOGUE.

     The general welcomes Tamburlaine receiv'd,
     When he arrived last upon the [1] stage,
     Have made our poet pen his Second Part,
     Where Death cuts off the progress of his pomp,
     And murderous Fates throw all his triumphs [2] down.
     But what became of fair Zenocrate,
     And with how many cities' sacrifice
     He celebrated her sad [3] funeral,
     Himself in presence shall unfold at large.




DRAMATIS PERSONAE.

     TAMBURLAINE, king of Persia.
     CALYPHAS,  ]
     AMYRAS,    ] his sons.
     CELEBINUS, ]
     THERIDAMAS, king of Argier.
     TECHELLES, king of Fez.
     USUMCASANE, king of Morocco.
     ORCANES, king of Natolia.
     KING OF TREBIZON.
     KING OF SORIA.
     KING OF JERUSALEM.
     KING OF AMASIA.
     GAZELLUS, viceroy of Byron.
     URIBASSA.
     SIGISMUND, King of Hungary.
     FREDERICK, ]
     BALDWIN,   ] Lords of Buda and Bohemia.
     CALLAPINE, son to BAJAZETH, and prisoner to TAMBURLAINE.
     ALMEDA, his keeper.
     GOVERNOR OF BABYLON.
     CAPTAIN OF BALSERA.
     HIS SON.
     ANOTHER CAPTAIN.
     MAXIMUS, PERDICAS, Physicians, Lords, Citizens, Messengers,
     Soldiers, and Attendants.

     ZENOCRATE, wife to TAMBURLAINE.
     OLYMPIA, wife to the CAPTAIN OF BALSERA.
     Turkish Concubines.




THE SECOND PART OF TAMBURLAINE THE GREAT.




ACT I.




SCENE I.

          Enter ORCANES king of Natolia, GAZELLUS viceroy of Byron,
          URIBASSA, [4] and their train, with drums and trumpets.

     ORCANES.  Egregious viceroys of these eastern parts,
     Plac'd by the issue of great Bajazeth,
     And sacred lord, the mighty Callapine,
     Who lives in Egypt prisoner to that slave
     Which kept his father in an iron cage,--
     Now have we march'd from fair Natolia
     Two hundred leagues, and on Danubius' banks
     Our warlike host, in complete armour, rest,
     Where Sigismund, the king of Hungary,
     Should meet our person to conclude a truce:
     What! shall we parle with the Christian?
     Or cross the stream, and meet him in the field?

     GAZELLUS.  King of Natolia, let us treat of peace:
     We all are glutted with the Christians' blood,
     And have a greater foe to fight against,--
     Proud Tamburlaine, that now in Asia,
     Near Guyron's head, doth set his conquering feet,
     And means to fire Turkey as he goes:
     'Gainst him, my lord, you must address your power.

     URIBASSA.  Besides, King Sigismund hath brought from Christendom
     More than his camp of stout Hungarians,--
     Sclavonians, Almains, Rutters, [5] Muffs, and Danes,
     That with the halberd, lance, and murdering axe,
     Will hazard that we might with surety hold.

     ORCANES. [6]  Though from the shortest northern parallel,
     Vast Grantland, compass'd with the Frozen Sea,
     (Inhabited with tall and sturdy men,
     Giants as big as hugy [7] Polypheme,)
     Millions of soldiers cut the [8] arctic line,
     Bringing the strength of Europe to these arms,
     Our Turkey blades shall glide through all their throats,
     And make this champion [9] mead a bloody fen:
     Danubius' stream, that runs to Trebizon,
     Shall carry, wrapt within his scarlet waves,
     As martial presents to our friends at home,
     The slaughter'd bodies of these Christians:
     The Terrene [10] main, wherein Danubius falls,
     Shall by this battle be the bloody sea:
     The wandering sailors of proud Italy
     Shall meet those Christians, fleeting with the tide,
     Beating in heaps against their argosies,
     And make fair Europe, mounted on her bull,
     Trapp'd with the wealth and riches of the world,
     Alight, and wear a woful mourning weed.

     GAZELLUS.  Yet, stout Orcanes, pro-rex of the world,
     Since Tamburlaine hath muster'd all his men,
     Marching from Cairo [11] northward, with his camp,
     To Alexandria and the frontier towns,
     Meaning to make a conquest of our land,
     'Tis requisite to parle for a peace
     With Sigismund, the king of Hungary,
     And save our forces for the hot assaults
     Proud Tamburlaine intends Natolia.

     ORCANES.  Viceroy of Byron, wisely hast thou said.
     My realm, the centre of our empery,
     Once lost, all Turkey would be overthrown;
     And for that cause the Christians shall have peace.
     Sclavonians, Almains, Rutters, Muffs, and Danes,
     Fear [12] not Orcanes, but great Tamburlaine;
     Nor he, but Fortune that hath made him great.
     We have revolted Grecians, Albanese,
     Sicilians, Jews, Arabians, Turks, and Moors,
     Natolians, Sorians, [13] black [14] Egyptians,
     Illyrians, Thracians, and Bithynians, [15]
     Enough to swallow forceless Sigismund,
     Yet scarce enough t' encounter Tamburlaine.
     He brings a world of people to the field,
     ]From Scythia to the oriental plage [16]
     Of India, where raging Lantchidol
     Beats on the regions with his boisterous blows,
     That never seaman yet discovered.
     All Asia is in arms with Tamburlaine,
     Even from the midst of fiery Cancer's tropic
     To Amazonia under Capricorn;
     And thence, as far as Archipelago,
     All Afric is in arms with Tamburlaine:
     Therefore, viceroy, [17] the Christians must have peace.

          Enter SIGISMUND, FREDERICK, BALDWIN, and their
          train, with drums and trumpets.

     SIGISMUND.  Orcanes, (as our legates promis'd thee,)
     We, with our peers, have cross'd Danubius' stream,
     To treat of friendly peace or deadly war.
     Take which thou wilt; for, as the Romans us'd,
     I here present thee with a naked sword:
     Wilt thou have war, then shake this blade at me;
     If peace, restore it to my hands again,
     And I will sheathe it, to confirm the same.

     ORCANES.  Stay, Sigismund:  forgett'st thou I am he
     That with the cannon shook Vienna-walls,
     And made it dance upon the continent,
     As when the massy substance of the earth
     Quiver[s] about the axle-tree of heaven?
     Forgett'st thou that I sent a shower of darts,
     Mingled with powder'd shot and feather'd steel,
     So thick upon the blink-ey'd burghers' heads,
     That thou thyself, then County Palatine,
     The King of Boheme, [18] and the Austric Duke,
     Sent heralds out, which basely on their knees,
     In all your names, desir'd a truce of me?
     Forgett'st thou that, to have me raise my siege,
     Waggons of gold were set before my tent,
     Stampt with the princely fowl that in her wings
     Carries the fearful thunderbolts of Jove?
     How canst thou think of this, and offer war?

     SIGISMUND.  Vienna was besieg'd, and I was there,
     Then County Palatine, but now a king,
     And what we did was in extremity
     But now, Orcanes, view my royal host,
     That hides these plains, and seems as vast and wide
     As doth the desert of Arabia
     To those that stand on Bagdet's [19] lofty tower,
     Or as the ocean to the traveller
     That rests upon the snowy Appenines;
     And tell me whether I should stoop so low,
     Or treat of peace with the Natolian king.

     GAZELLUS.  Kings of Natolia and of Hungary,
     We came from Turkey to confirm a league,
     And not to dare each other to the field.
     A friendly parle [20] might become you both.

     FREDERICK.  And we from Europe, to the same intent; [21]
     Which if your general refuse or scorn,
     Our tents are pitch'd, our men stand [22] in array,
     Ready to charge you ere you stir your feet.

     ORCANES.  So prest [23] are we:  but yet, if Sigismund
     Speak as a friend, and stand not upon terms,
     Here is his sword; let peace be ratified
     On these conditions specified before,
     Drawn with advice of our ambassadors.

     SIGISMUND.  Then here I sheathe it, and give thee my hand,
     Never to draw it out, or [24] manage arms
     Against thyself or thy confederates,
     But, whilst I live, will be at truce with thee.

     ORCANES.  But, Sigismund, confirm it with an oath,
     And swear in sight of heaven and by thy Christ.

     SIGISMUND.  By Him that made the world and sav'd my soul,
     The Son of God and issue of a maid,
     Sweet Jesus Christ, I solemnly protest
     And vow to keep this peace inviolable!

     ORCANES.  By sacred Mahomet, the friend of God,
     Whose holy Alcoran remains with us,
     Whose glorious body, when he left the world,
     Clos'd in a coffin mounted up the air,
     And hung on stately Mecca's temple-roof,
     I swear to keep this truce inviolable!
     Of whose conditions [25] and our solemn oaths,
     Sign'd with our hands, each shall retain a scroll,
     As memorable witness of our league.
     Now, Sigismund, if any Christian king
     Encroach upon the confines of thy realm,
     Send word, Orcanes of Natolia
     Confirm'd [26] this league beyond Danubius' stream,
     And they will, trembling, sound a quick retreat;
     So am I fear'd among all nations.

     SIGISMUND.  If any heathen potentate or king
     Invade Natolia, Sigismund will send
     A hundred thousand horse train'd to the war,
     And back'd by [27] stout lanciers of Germany,
     The strength and sinews of the imperial seat.

     ORCANES.  I thank thee, Sigismund; but, when I war,
     All Asia Minor, Africa, and Greece,
     Follow my standard and my thundering drums.
     Come, let us go and banquet in our tents:
     I will despatch chief of my army hence
     To fair Natolia and to Trebizon,
     To stay my coming 'gainst proud Tamburlaine:
     Friend Sigismund, and peers of Hungary,
     Come, banquet and carouse with us a while,
     And then depart we to our territories.
          [Exeunt.]




SCENE II.

          Enter CALLAPINE, and ALMEDA his keeper.

     CALLAPINE.  Sweet Almeda, pity the ruthful plight
     Of Callapine, the son of Bajazeth,
     Born to be monarch of the western world,
     Yet here detain'd by cruel Tamburlaine.

     ALMEDA.  My lord, I pity it, and with my heart
     Wish your release; but he whose wrath is death,
     My sovereign lord, renowmed [28] Tamburlaine,
     Forbids you further liberty than this.

     CALLAPINE.  Ah, were I now but half so eloquent
     To paint in words what I'll perform in deeds,
     I know thou wouldst depart from hence with me!

     ALMEDA.  Not for all Afric:  therefore move me not.

     CALLAPINE.  Yet hear me speak, my gentle Almeda.

     ALMEDA.  No speech to that end, by your favour, sir.

     CALLAPINE.  By Cairo [29] runs--

     ALMEDA.  No talk of running, I tell you, sir.

     CALLAPINE.  A little further, gentle Almeda.

     ALMEDA.  Well, sir, what of this?

     CALLAPINE.  By Cairo runs to Alexandria-bay
     Darotes' stream, [30] wherein at [31] anchor lies
     A Turkish galley of my royal fleet,
     Waiting my coming to the river-side,
     Hoping by some means I shall be releas'd;
     Which, when I come aboard, will hoist up sail,
     And soon put forth into the Terrene [32] sea,
     Where, [33] 'twixt the isles of Cyprus and of Crete,
     We quickly may in Turkish seas arrive.
     Then shalt thou see a hundred kings and more,
     Upon their knees, all bid me welcome home.
     Amongst so many crowns of burnish'd gold,
     Choose which thou wilt, all are at thy command:
     A thousand galleys, mann'd with Christian slaves,
     I freely give thee, which shall cut the Straits,
     And bring armadoes, from [34] the coasts of Spain,
     Fraughted with gold of rich America:
     The Grecian virgins shall attend on thee,
     Skilful in music and in amorous lays,
     As fair as was Pygmalion's ivory girl
     Or lovely Io metamorphosed:
     With naked negroes shall thy coach be drawn,
     And, as thou rid'st in triumph through the streets,
     The pavement underneath thy chariot-wheels
     With Turkey-carpets shall be covered,
     And cloth of arras hung about the walls,
     Fit objects for thy princely eye to pierce:
     A hundred bassoes, cloth'd in crimson silk,
     Shall ride before thee on Barbarian steeds;
     And, when thou goest, a golden canopy
     Enchas'd with precious stones, which shine as bright
     As that fair veil that covers all the world,
     When Phoebus, leaping from his hemisphere,
     Descendeth downward to th' Antipodes:--
     And more than this, for all I cannot tell.

     ALMEDA.  How far hence lies the galley, say you?

     CALLAPINE.  Sweet Almeda, scarce half a league from hence.

     ALMEDA.  But need [35] we not be spied going aboard?

     CALLAPINE.  Betwixt the hollow hanging of a hill,
     And crooked bending of a craggy rock,
     The sails wrapt up, the mast and tacklings down,
     She lies so close that none can find her out.

     ALMEDA.  I like that well:  but, tell me, my lord,
     if I should let you go, would you be as good as
     your word? shall I be made a king for my labour?

     CALLAPINE.  As I am Callapine the emperor,
     And by the hand of Mahomet I swear,
     Thou shalt be crown'd a king, and be my mate!

     ALMEDA.  Then here I swear, as I am Almeda,
     Your keeper under Tamburlaine the Great,
     (For that's the style and title I have yet,)
     Although he sent a thousand armed men
     To intercept this haughty enterprize,
     Yet would I venture to conduct your grace,
     And die before I brought you back again!

     CALLAPINE.  Thanks, gentle Almeda:  then let us haste,
     Lest time be past, and lingering let [36] us both.

     ALMEDA.  When you will, my lord:  I am ready.

     CALLAPINE.  Even straight:--and farewell, cursed Tamburlaine!
     Now go I to revenge my father's death.
          [Exeunt.]




SCENE III.

          Enter TAMBURLAINE, ZENOCRATE, and their three sons,
          CALYPHAS, AMYRAS, and CELEBINUS, with drums and trumpets.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Now, bright Zenocrate, the world's fair eye,
     Whose beams illuminate the lamps of heaven,
     Whose cheerful looks do clear the cloudy air,
     And clothe it in a crystal livery,
     Now rest thee here on fair Larissa-plains,
     Where Egypt and the Turkish empire part
     Between thy sons, that shall be emperors,
     And every one commander of a world.

     ZENOCRATE.  Sweet Tamburlaine, when wilt thou leave these arms,
     And save thy sacred person free from scathe,
     And dangerous chances of the wrathful war?

     TAMBURLAINE.  When heaven shall cease to move on both the poles,
     And when the ground, whereon my soldiers march,
     Shall rise aloft and touch the horned moon;
     And not before, my sweet Zenocrate.
     Sit up, and rest thee like a lovely queen.
     So; now she sits in pomp and majesty,
     When these, my sons, more precious in mine eyes
     Than all the wealthy kingdoms I subdu'd,
     Plac'd by her side, look on their mother's face.
     But yet methinks their looks are amorous,
     Not martial as the sons of Tamburlaine:
     Water and air, being symboliz'd in one,
     Argue their want of courage and of wit;
     Their hair as white as milk, and soft as down,
     (Which should be like the quills of porcupines,
     As black as jet, and hard as iron or steel,)
     Bewrays they are too dainty for the wars;
     Their fingers made to quaver on a lute,
     Their arms to hang about a lady's neck,
     Their legs to dance and caper in the air,
     Would make me think them bastards, not my sons,
     But that I know they issu'd from thy womb,
     That never look'd on man but Tamburlaine.

     ZENOCRATE.  My gracious lord, they have their mother's looks,
     But, when they list, their conquering father's heart.
     This lovely boy, the youngest of the three,
     Not long ago bestrid a Scythian steed,
     Trotting the ring, and tilting at a glove,
     Which when he tainted [37] with his slender rod,
     He rein'd him straight, and made him so curvet
     As I cried out for fear he should have faln.

     TAMBURLAINE.
     Well done, my boy! thou shalt have shield and lance,
     Armour of proof, horse, helm, and curtle-axe,
     And I will teach thee how to charge thy foe,
     And harmless run among the deadly pikes.
     If thou wilt love the wars and follow me,
     Thou shalt be made a king and reign with me,
     Keeping in iron cages emperors.
     If thou exceed thy elder brothers' worth,
     And shine in complete virtue more than they,
     Thou shalt be king before them, and thy seed
     Shall issue crowned from their mother's womb.

     CELEBINUS.  Yes, father; you shall see me, if I live,
     Have under me as many kings as you,
     And march with such a multitude of men
     As all the world shall [38] tremble at their view.

     TAMBURLAINE.  These words assure me, boy, thou art my son.
     When I am old and cannot manage arms,
     Be thou the scourge and terror of the world.

     AMYRAS.  Why may not I, my lord, as well as he,
     Be term'd the scourge and terror of [39] the world?

     TAMBURLAINE.  Be all a scourge and terror to [40] the world,
     Or else you are not sons of Tamburlaine.

     CALYPHAS.  But, while my brothers follow arms, my lord,
     Let me accompany my gracious mother:
     They are enough to conquer all the world,
     And you have won enough for me to keep.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Bastardly boy, sprung [41] from some coward's loins,
     And not the issue of great Tamburlaine!
     Of all the provinces I have subdu'd
     Thou shalt not have a foot, unless thou bear
     A mind courageous and invincible;
     For he shall wear the crown of Persia
     Whose head hath deepest scars, whose breast most wounds,
     Which, being wroth, sends lightning from his eyes,
     And in the furrows of his frowning brows
     Harbours revenge, war, death, and cruelty;
     For in a field, whose superficies [42]
     Is cover'd with a liquid purple veil,
     And sprinkled with the brains of slaughter'd men,
     My royal chair of state shall be advanc'd;
     And he that means to place himself therein,
     Must armed wade up to the chin in blood.

     ZENOCRATE.  My lord, such speeches to our princely sons
     Dismay their minds before they come to prove
     The wounding troubles angry war affords.

     CELEBINUS.  No, madam, these are speeches fit for us;
     For, if his chair were in a sea of blood,
     I would prepare a ship and sail to it,
     Ere I would lose the title of a king.

     AMYRAS.  And I would strive to swim through [43] pools of blood,
     Or make a bridge of murder'd carcasses, [44]
     Whose arches should be fram'd with bones of Turks,
     Ere I would lose the title of a king.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Well, lovely boys, ye shall be emperors both,
     Stretching your conquering arms from east to west:--
     And, sirrah, if you mean to wear a crown,
     When we [45] shall meet the Turkish deputy
     And all his viceroys, snatch it from his head,
     And cleave his pericranion with thy sword.

     CALYPHAS.  If any man will hold him, I will strike,
     And cleave him to the channel [46] with my sword.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Hold him, and cleave him too, or I'll cleave thee;
     For we will march against them presently.
     Theridamas, Techelles, and Casane
     Promis'd to meet me on Larissa-plains,
     With hosts a-piece against this Turkish crew;
     For I have sworn by sacred Mahomet
     To make it parcel of my empery.
     The trumpets sound; Zenocrate, they come.
          Enter THERIDAMAS, and his train, with drums and trumpets.
     Welcome, Theridamas, king of Argier.

     THERIDAMAS.  My lord, the great and mighty Tamburlaine,
     Arch-monarch of the world, I offer here
     My crown, myself, and all the power I have,
     In all affection at thy kingly feet.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Thanks, good Theridamas.

     THERIDAMAS.  Under my colours march ten thousand Greeks,
     And of Argier and Afric's frontier towns
     Twice twenty thousand valiant men-at-arms;
     All which have sworn to sack Natolia.
     Five hundred brigandines are under sail,
     Meet for your service on the sea, my lord,
     That, launching from Argier to Tripoly,
     Will quickly ride before Natolia,
     And batter down the castles on the shore.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Well said, Argier! receive thy crown again.
          Enter USUMCASANE and TECHELLES.
     Kings of Morocco [47] and of Fez, welcome.

     USUMCASANE.  Magnificent and peerless Tamburlaine,
     I and my neighbour king of Fez have brought,
     To aid thee in this Turkish expedition,
     A hundred thousand expert soldiers;
     ]From Azamor to Tunis near the sea
     Is Barbary unpeopled for thy sake,
     And all the men in armour under me,
     Which with my crown I gladly offer thee.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Thanks, king of Morocco:  take your crown again.

     TECHELLES.  And, mighty Tamburlaine, our earthly god,
     Whose looks make this inferior world to quake,
     I here present thee with the crown of Fez,
     And with an host of Moors train'd to the war, [48]
     Whose coal-black faces make their foes retire,
     And quake for fear, as if infernal [49] Jove,
     Meaning to aid thee [50] in these [51] Turkish arms,
     Should pierce the black circumference of hell,
     With ugly Furies bearing fiery flags,
     And millions of his strong [52] tormenting spirits:
     ]From strong Tesella unto Biledull
     All Barbary is unpeopled for thy sake.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Thanks, king of Fez:  take here thy crown again.
     Your presence, loving friends and fellow-kings,
     Makes me to surfeit in conceiving joy:
     If all the crystal gates of Jove's high court
     Were open'd wide, and I might enter in
     To see the state and majesty of heaven,
     It could not more delight me than your sight.
     Now will we banquet on these plains a while,
     And after march to Turkey with our camp,
     In number more than are the drops that fall
     When Boreas rents a thousand swelling clouds;
     And proud Orcanes of Natolia
     With all his viceroys shall be so afraid,
     That, though the stones, as at Deucalion's flood,
     Were turn'd to men, he should be overcome.
     Such lavish will I make of Turkish blood,
     That Jove shall send his winged messenger
     To bid me sheathe my sword and leave the field;
     The sun, unable to sustain the sight,
     Shall hide his head in Thetis' watery lap,
     And leave his steeds to fair Bootes' [53] charge;
     For half the world shall perish in this fight.
     But now, my friends, let me examine ye;
     How have ye spent your absent time from me?

     USUMCASANE.  My lord, our men of Barbary have march'd
     Four hundred miles with armour on their backs,
     And lain in leaguer [54] fifteen months and more;
     For, since we left you at the Soldan's court,
     We have subdu'd the southern Guallatia,
     And all the land unto the coast of Spain;
     We kept the narrow Strait of Jubalter, [55]
     And made Canaria call us kings and lords:
     Yet never did they recreate themselves,
     Or cease one day from war and hot alarms;
     And therefore let them rest a while, my lord.

     TAMBURLAINE.  They shall, Casane, and 'tis time, i'faith.

     TECHELLES.  And I have march'd along the river Nile
     To Machda, where the mighty Christian priest,
     Call'd John the Great, [56] sits in a milk-white robe,
     Whose triple mitre I did take by force,
     And made him swear obedience to my crown.
     ]From thence unto Cazates did I march,
     Where Amazonians met me in the field,
     With whom, being women, I vouchsaf'd a league,
     And with my power did march to Zanzibar,
     The western part of Afric, where I view'd
     The Ethiopian sea, rivers and lakes,
     But neither man nor child in all the land:
     Therefore I took my course to Manico,
     Where, [57] unresisted, I remov'd my camp;
     And, by the coast of Byather, [58] at last
     I came to Cubar, where the negroes dwell,
     And, conquering that, made haste to Nubia.
     There, having sack'd Borno, the kingly seat,
     I took the king and led him bound in chains
     Unto Damascus, [59] where I stay'd before.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Well done, Techelles!--What saith Theridamas?

     THERIDAMAS.  I left the confines and the bounds of Afric,
     And made [60] a voyage into Europe,
     Where, by the river Tyras, I subdu'd
     Stoka, Podolia, and Codemia;
     Then cross'd the sea and came to Oblia,
     And Nigra Silva, where the devils dance,
     Which, in despite of them, I set on fire.
     ]From thence I cross'd the gulf call'd by the name
     Mare Majore of the inhabitants.
     Yet shall my soldiers make no period
     Until Natolia kneel before your feet.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Then will we triumph, banquet and carouse;
     Cooks shall have pensions to provide us cates,
     And glut us with the dainties of the world;
     Lachryma Christi and Calabrian wines
     Shall common soldiers drink in quaffing bowls,
     Ay, liquid gold, when we have conquer'd him, [61]
     Mingled with coral and with orient [62] pearl.
     Come, let us banquet and carouse the whiles.
          [Exeunt.]




ACT II.




SCENE I.

          Enter SIGISMUND, FREDERICK, and BALDWIN, with their train.

     SIGISMUND.  Now say, my lords of Buda and Bohemia,
     What motion is it that inflames your thoughts,
     And stirs your valours to such sudden arms?

     FREDERICK.  Your majesty remembers, I am sure,
     What cruel slaughter of our Christian bloods
     These heathenish Turks and pagans lately made
     Betwixt the city Zula and Danubius;
     How through the midst of Varna and Bulgaria,
     And almost to the very walls of Rome,
     They have, not long since, massacred our camp.
     It resteth now, then, that your majesty
     Take all advantages of time and power,
     And work revenge upon these infidels.
     Your highness knows, for Tamburlaine's repair,
     That strikes a terror to all Turkish hearts,
     Natolia hath dismiss'd the greatest part
     Of all his army, pitch'd against our power
     Betwixt Cutheia and Orminius' mount,
     And sent them marching up to Belgasar,
     Acantha, Antioch, and Caesarea,
     To aid the kings of Soria [63] and Jerusalem.
     Now, then, my lord, advantage take thereof, [64]
     And issue suddenly upon the rest;
     That, in the fortune of their overthrow,
     We may discourage all the pagan troop
     That dare attempt to war with Christians.

     SIGISMUND.  But calls not, then, your grace to memory
     The league we lately made with King Orcanes,
     Confirm'd by oath and articles of peace,
     And calling Christ for record of our truths?
     This should be treachery and violence
     Against the grace of our profession.

     BALDWIN.  No whit, my lord; for with such infidels,
     In whom no faith nor true religion rests,
     We are not bound to those accomplishments
     The holy laws of Christendom enjoin;
     But, as the faith which they profanely plight
     Is not by necessary policy
     To be esteem'd assurance for ourselves,
     So that we vow [65] to them should not infringe
     Our liberty of arms and victory.

     SIGISMUND.  Though I confess the oaths they undertake
     Breed little strength to our security,
     Yet those infirmities that thus defame
     Their faiths, [66] their honours, and religion, [67]
     Should not give us presumption to the like.
     Our faiths are sound, and must be consummate, [68]
     Religious, righteous, and inviolate.

     FREDERICK.  Assure your grace, 'tis superstition
     To stand so strictly on dispensive faith;
     And, should we lose the opportunity
     That God hath given to venge our Christians' death,
     And scourge their foul blasphemous paganism,
     As fell to Saul, to Balaam, and the rest,
     That would not kill and curse at God's command,
     So surely will the vengeance of the Highest,
     And jealous anger of his fearful arm,
     Be pour'd with rigour on our sinful heads,
     If we neglect this [69] offer'd victory.

     SIGISMUND.  Then arm, my lords, and issue suddenly,
     Giving commandment to our general host,
     With expedition to assail the pagan,
     And take the victory our God hath given.
          [Exeunt.]




SCENE II.

          Enter ORCANES, GAZELLUS, and URIBASSA, with their train.

     ORCANES.  Gazellus, Uribassa, and the rest,
     Now will we march from proud Orminius' mount
     To fair Natolia, where our neighbour kings
     Expect our power and our royal presence,
     T' encounter with the cruel Tamburlaine,
     That nigh Larissa sways a mighty host,
     And with the thunder of his martial [70] tools
     Makes earthquakes in the hearts of men and heaven.

     GAZELLUS.  And now come we to make his sinews shake
     With greater power than erst his pride hath felt.
     An hundred kings, by scores, will bid him arms,
     And hundred thousands subjects to each score:
     Which, if a shower of wounding thunderbolts
     Should break out of the bowels of the clouds,
     And fall as thick as hail upon our heads,
     In partial aid of that proud Scythian,
     Yet should our courages and steeled crests,
     And numbers, more than infinite, of men,
     Be able to withstand and conquer him.

     URIBASSA.  Methinks I see how glad the Christian king
     Is made for joy of our [71] admitted truce,
     That could not but before be terrified
     With [72] unacquainted power of our host.

          Enter a Messenger.

     MESSENGER.  Arm, dread sovereign, and my noble lords!
     The treacherous army of the Christians,
     Taking advantage of your slender power,
     Comes marching on us, and determines straight
     To bid us battle for our dearest lives.

     ORCANES.  Traitors, villains, damned Christians!
     Have I not here the articles of peace
     And solemn covenants we have both confirm'd,
     He by his Christ, and I by Mahomet?

     GAZELLUS.  Hell and confusion light upon their heads,
     That with such treason seek our overthrow,
     And care so little for their prophet Christ!

     ORCANES.  Can there be such deceit in Christians,
     Or treason in the fleshly heart of man,
     Whose shape is figure of the highest God?
     Then, if there be a Christ, as Christians say,
     But in their deeds deny him for their Christ,
     If he be son to everliving Jove,
     And hath the power of his outstretched arm,
     If he be jealous of his name and honour
     As is our holy prophet Mahomet,
     Take here these papers as our sacrifice
     And witness of thy servant's [73] perjury!
          [He tears to pieces the articles of peace.]
     Open, thou shining veil of Cynthia,
     And make a passage from th' empyreal heaven,
     That he that sits on high and never sleeps,
     Nor in one place is circumscriptible,
     But every where fills every continent
     With strange infusion of his sacred vigour,
     May, in his endless power and purity,
     Behold and venge this traitor's perjury!
     Thou, Christ, that art esteem'd omnipotent,
     If thou wilt prove thyself a perfect God,
     Worthy the worship of all faithful hearts,
     Be now reveng'd upon this traitor's soul,
     And make the power I have left behind
     (Too little to defend our guiltless lives)
     Sufficient to discomfit [74] and confound
     The trustless force of those false Christians!--
     To arms, my lords! [75] on Christ still let us cry:
     If there be Christ, we shall have victory.
          [Exeunt.]




SCENE III.

          Alarms of battle within.  Enter SIGISMUND wounded.

     SIGISMUND.  Discomfited is all the Christian [76] host,
     And God hath thunder'd vengeance from on high,
     For my accurs'd and hateful perjury.
     O just and dreadful punisher of sin,
     Let the dishonour of the pains I feel
     In this my mortal well-deserved wound
     End all my penance in my sudden death!
     And let this death, wherein to sin I die,
     Conceive a second life in endless mercy!
          [Dies.]

          Enter ORCANES, GAZELLUS, URIBASSA, with others.

     ORCANES.  Now lie the Christians bathing in their bloods,
     And Christ or Mahomet hath been my friend.

     GAZELLUS.  See, here the perjur'd traitor Hungary,
     Bloody and breathless for his villany!

     ORCANES.  Now shall his barbarous body be a prey
     To beasts and fowls, and all the winds shall breathe,
     Through shady leaves of every senseless tree,
     Murmurs and hisses for his heinous sin.
     Now scalds his soul in the Tartarian streams,
     And feeds upon the baneful tree of hell,
     That Zoacum, [77] that fruit of bitterness,
     That in the midst of fire is ingraff'd,
     Yet flourisheth, as Flora in her pride,
     With apples like the heads of damned fiends.
     The devils there, in chains of quenchless flame,
     Shall lead his soul, through Orcus' burning gulf,
     ]From pain to pain, whose change shall never end.
     What say'st thou yet, Gazellus, to his foil,
     Which we referr'd to justice of his Christ
     And to his power, which here appears as full
     As rays of Cynthia to the clearest sight?

     GAZELLUS.  'Tis but the fortune of the wars, my lord,
     Whose power is often prov'd a miracle.

     ORCANES.  Yet in my thoughts shall Christ be honoured,
     Not doing Mahomet an [78] injury,
     Whose power had share in this our victory;
     And, since this miscreant hath disgrac'd his faith,
     And died a traitor both to heaven and earth,
     We will both watch and ward shall keep his trunk [79]
     Amidst these plains for fowls to prey upon.
     Go, Uribassa, give [80] it straight in charge.

     URIBASSA.  I will, my lord.
          [Exit.]

     ORCANES.  And now, Gazellus, let us haste and meet
     Our army, and our brother[s] of Jerusalem,
     Of Soria, [81] Trebizon, and Amasia,
     And happily, with full Natolian bowls
     Of Greekish wine, now let us celebrate
     Our happy conquest and his angry fate.
          [Exeunt.]




SCENE IV.

          The arras is drawn, and ZENOCRATE is discovered lying
          in her bed of state; TAMBURLAINE sitting by her; three
          PHYSICIANS about her bed, tempering potions; her three
          sons, CALYPHAS, AMYRAS, and CELEBINUS; THERIDAMAS,
          TECHELLES, and USUMCASANE.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Black is the beauty of the brightest day;
     The golden ball of heaven's eternal fire,
     That danc'd with glory on the silver waves,
     Now wants the fuel that inflam'd his beams;
     And all with faintness, and for foul disgrace,
     He binds his temples with a frowning cloud,
     Ready to darken earth with endless night.
     Zenocrate, that gave him light and life,
     Whose eyes shot fire from their [82] ivory brows, [83]
     And temper'd every soul with lively heat,
     Now by the malice of the angry skies,
     Whose jealousy admits no second mate,
     Draws in the comfort of her latest breath,
     All dazzled with the hellish mists of death.
     Now walk the angels on the walls of heaven,
     As sentinels to warn th' immortal souls
     To entertain divine Zenocrate:
     Apollo, Cynthia, and the ceaseless lamps
     That gently look'd upon this [84] loathsome earth,
     Shine downwards now no more, but deck the heavens
     To entertain divine Zenocrate:
     The crystal springs, whose taste illuminates
     Refined eyes with an eternal sight,
     Like tried silver run through Paradise
     To entertain divine Zenocrate:
     The cherubins and holy seraphins,
     That sing and play before the King of Kings,
     Use all their voices and their instruments
     To entertain divine Zenocrate;
     And, in this sweet and curious harmony,
     The god that tunes this music to our souls
     Holds out his hand in highest majesty
     To entertain divine Zenocrate.
     Then let some holy trance convey my thoughts
     Up to the palace of th' empyreal heaven,
     That this my life may be as short to me
     As are the days of sweet Zenocrate.--
     Physicians, will no [85] physic do her good?

     FIRST PHYSICIAN.  My lord, your majesty shall soon perceive,
     An if she pass this fit, the worst is past.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Tell me, how fares my fair Zenocrate?

     ZENOCRATE.  I fare, my lord, as other empresses,
     That, when this frail and [86] transitory flesh
     Hath suck'd the measure of that vital air
     That feeds the body with his dated health,
     Wane with enforc'd and necessary change.

     TAMBURLAINE.  May never such a change transform my love,
     In whose sweet being I repose my life!
     Whose heavenly presence, beautified with health,
     Gives light to Phoebus and the fixed stars;
     Whose absence makes [87] the sun and moon as dark
     As when, oppos'd in one diameter,
     Their spheres are mounted on the serpent's head,
     Or else descended to his winding train.
     Live still, my love, and so conserve my life,
     Or, dying, be the author [88] of my death.

     ZENOCRATE.  Live still, my lord; O, let my sovereign live!
     And sooner let the fiery element
     Dissolve, and make your kingdom in the sky,
     Than this base earth should shroud your majesty;
     For, should I but suspect your death by mine,
     The comfort of my future happiness,
     And hope to meet your highness in the heavens,
     Turn'd to despair, would break my wretched breast,
     And fury would confound my present rest.
     But let me die, my love; yes, [89] let me die;
     With love and patience let your true love die:
     Your grief and fury hurts my second life.
     Yet let me kiss my lord before I die,
     And let me die with kissing of my lord.
     But, since my life is lengthen'd yet a while,
     Let me take leave of these my loving sons,
     And of my lords, whose true nobility
     Have merited my latest memory.
     Sweet sons, farewell! in death resemble me,
     And in your lives your father's excellence. [90]
     Some music, and my fit will cease, my lord.
          [They call for music.]

     TAMBURLAINE.  Proud fury, and intolerable fit,
     That dares torment the body of my love,
     And scourge the scourge of the immortal God!
     Now are those spheres, where Cupid us'd to sit,
     Wounding the world with wonder and with love,
     Sadly supplied with pale and ghastly death,
     Whose darts do pierce the centre of my soul.
     Her sacred beauty hath enchanted heaven;
     And, had she liv'd before the siege of Troy,
     Helen, whose beauty summon'd Greece to arms,
     And drew a thousand ships to Tenedos,
     Had not been nam'd in Homer's Iliads,--
     Her name had been in every line he wrote;
     Or, had those wanton poets, for whose birth
     Old Rome was proud, but gaz'd a while on her,
     Nor Lesbia nor Corinna had been nam'd,--
     Zenocrate had been the argument
     Of every epigram or elegy.
          [The music sounds--ZENOCRATE dies.]
     What, is she dead?  Techelles, draw thy sword,
     And wound the earth, that it may cleave in twain,
     And we descend into th' infernal vaults,
     To hale the Fatal Sisters by the hair,
     And throw them in the triple moat of hell,
     For taking hence my fair Zenocrate.
     Casane and Theridamas, to arms!
     Raise cavalieros [91] higher than the clouds,
     And with the cannon break the frame of heaven;
     Batter the shining palace of the sun,
     And shiver all the starry firmament,
     For amorous Jove hath snatch'd my love from hence,
     Meaning to make her stately queen of heaven.
     What god soever holds thee in his arms,
     Giving thee nectar and ambrosia,
     Behold me here, divine Zenocrate,
     Raving, impatient, desperate, and mad,
     Breaking my steeled lance, with which I burst
     The rusty beams of Janus' temple-doors,
     Letting out Death and tyrannizing War,
     To march with me under this bloody flag!
     And, if thou pitiest Tamburlaine the Great,
     Come down from heaven, and live with me again!

     THERIDAMAS.  Ah, good my lord, be patient! she is dead,
     And all this raging cannot make her live.
     If words might serve, our voice hath rent the air;
     If tears, our eyes have water'd all the earth;
     If grief, our murder'd hearts have strain'd forth blood:
     Nothing prevails, [92] for she is dead, my lord.

     TAMBURLAINE.  FOR SHE IS DEAD! thy words do pierce my soul:
     Ah, sweet Theridamas, say so no more!
     Though she be dead, yet let me think she lives,
     And feed my mind that dies for want of her.
     Where'er her soul be, thou [To the body] shalt stay with me,
     Embalm'd with cassia, ambergris, and myrrh,
     Not lapt in lead, but in a sheet of gold,
     And, till I die, thou shalt not be interr'd.
     Then in as rich a tomb as Mausolus' [93]
     We both will rest, and have one [94] epitaph
     Writ in as many several languages
     As I have conquer'd kingdoms with my sword.
     This cursed town will I consume with fire,
     Because this place bereft me of my love;
     The houses, burnt, will look as if they mourn'd;
     And here will I set up her stature, [95]
     And march about it with my mourning camp,
     Drooping and pining for Zenocrate.
          [The arras is drawn.]




ACT III.




SCENE I.

          Enter the KINGS OF TREBIZON and SORIA, [96] one bringing a
          sword and the other a sceptre; next, ORCANES king of
          Natolia, and the KING OF JERUSALEM with the imperial crown,
          after, CALLAPINE; and, after him, other LORDS and ALMEDA.
          ORCANES and the KING OF JERUSALEM crown CALLAPINE, and the
          others give him the sceptre.

     ORCANES.  Callapinus Cyricelibes, otherwise Cybelius, son and
     successive heir to the late mighty emperor Bajazeth, by the aid
     of God and his friend Mahomet, Emperor of Natolia, Jerusalem,
     Trebizon, Soria, Amasia, Thracia, Ilyria, Carmania, and all the
     hundred and thirty kingdoms late contributory to his mighty
     father,--long live Callapinus, Emperor of Turkey!

     CALLAPINE.  Thrice-worthy kings, of Natolia and the rest,
     I will requite your royal gratitudes
     With all the benefits my empire yields;
     And, were the sinews of th' imperial seat
     So knit and strengthen'd as when Bajazeth,
     My royal lord and father, fill'd the throne,
     Whose cursed fate [97] hath so dismember'd it,
     Then should you see this thief of Scythia,
     This proud usurping king of Persia,
     Do us such honour and supremacy,
     Bearing the vengeance of our father's wrongs,
     As all the world should blot his [98] dignities
     Out of the book of base-born infamies.
     And now I doubt not but your royal cares
     Have so provided for this cursed foe,
     That, since the heir of mighty Bajazeth
     (An emperor so honour'd for his virtues)
     Revives the spirits of all [99] true Turkish hearts,
     In grievous memory of his father's shame,
     We shall not need to nourish any doubt,
     But that proud Fortune, who hath follow'd long
     The martial sword of mighty Tamburlaine,
     Will now retain her old inconstancy,
     And raise our honours [100] to as high a pitch,
     In this our strong and fortunate encounter;
     For so hath heaven provided my escape
     ]From all the cruelty my soul sustain'd,
     By this my friendly keeper's happy means,
     That Jove, surcharg'd with pity of our wrongs,
     Will pour it down in showers on our heads,
     Scourging the pride of cursed Tamburlaine.

     ORCANES.  I have a hundred thousand men in arms;
     Some that, in conquest [101] of the perjur'd Christian,
     Being a handful to a mighty host,
     Think them in number yet sufficient
     To drink the river Nile or Euphrates,
     And for their power enow to win the world.

     KING OF JERUSALEM.  And I as many from Jerusalem,
     Judaea, [102] Gaza, and Sclavonia's [103] bounds,
     That on mount Sinai, with their ensigns spread,
     Look like the parti-colour'd clouds of heaven
     That shew fair weather to the neighbour morn.

     KING OF TREBIZON.  And I as many bring from Trebizon,
     Chio, Famastro, and Amasia,
     All bordering on the Mare-Major-sea,
     Riso, Sancina, and the bordering towns
     That touch the end of famous Euphrates,
     Whose courages are kindled with the flames
     The cursed Scythian sets on all their towns,
     And vow to burn the villain's cruel heart.

     KING OF SORIA.  From Soria [104] with seventy thousand strong,
     Ta'en from Aleppo, Soldino, Tripoly,
     And so unto my city of Damascus, [105]
     I march to meet and aid my neighbour kings;
     All which will join against this Tamburlaine,
     And bring him captive to your highness' feet.

     ORCANES.  Our battle, then, in martial manner pitch'd,
     According to our ancient use, shall bear
     The figure of the semicircled moon,
     Whose horns shell sprinkle through the tainted air
     The poison'd brains of this proud Scythian.

     CALLAPINE.  Well, then, my noble lords, for this my friend
     That freed me from the bondage of my foe,
     I think it requisite and honourable
     To keep my promise and to make him king,
     That is a gentleman, I know, at least.

     ALMEDA.  That's no matter, [106] sir, for being a king;
     or Tamburlaine came up of nothing.

     KING OF JERUSALEM.  Your majesty may choose some 'pointed time,
     Performing all your promise to the full;
     'Tis naught for your majesty to give a kingdom.

     CALLAPINE.  Then will I shortly keep my promise, Almeda.

     ALMEDA.  Why, I thank your majesty.
          [Exeunt.]




SCENE II.

          Enter TAMBURLAINE and his three sons, CALYPHAS, AMYRAS, and
          CELEBINUS; USUMCASANE; four ATTENDANTS bearing the hearse of
          ZENOCRATE, and the drums sounding a doleful march; the town
          burning.

     TAMBURLAINE.  So burn the turrets of this cursed town,
     Flame to the highest region of the air,
     And kindle heaps of exhalations,
     That, being fiery meteors, may presage
     Death and destruction to the inhabitants!
     Over my zenith hang a blazing star,
     That may endure till heaven be dissolv'd,
     Fed with the fresh supply of earthly dregs,
     Threatening a dearth [107] and famine to this land!
     Flying dragons, lightning, fearful thunder-claps,
     Singe these fair plains, and make them seem as black
     As is the island where the Furies mask,
     Compass'd with Lethe, Styx, and Phlegethon,
     Because my dear Zenocrate is dead!

     CALYPHAS.  This pillar, plac'd in memory of her,
     Where in Arabian, Hebrew, Greek, is writ,
     THIS TOWN, BEING BURNT BY TAMBURLAINE THE GREAT,
     FORBIDS THE WORLD TO BUILD IT UP AGAIN.

     AMYRAS.  And here this mournful streamer shall be plac'd,
     Wrought with the Persian and th' [108] Egyptian arms,
     To signify she was a princess born,
     And wife unto the monarch of the East.

     CELEBINUS.  And here this table as a register
     Of all her virtues and perfections.

     TAMBURLAINE.  And here the picture of Zenocrate,
     To shew her beauty which the world admir'd;
     Sweet picture of divine Zenocrate,
     That, hanging here, will draw the gods from heaven,
     And cause the stars fix'd in the southern arc,
     (Whose lovely faces never any view'd
     That have not pass'd the centre's latitude,)
     As pilgrims travel to our hemisphere,
     Only to gaze upon Zenocrate.
     Thou shalt not beautify Larissa-plains,
     But keep within the circle of mine arms:
     At every town and castle I besiege,
     Thou shalt be set upon my royal tent;
     And, when I meet an army in the field,
     Those [109] looks will shed such influence in my camp,
     As if Bellona, goddess of the war,
     Threw naked swords and sulphur-balls of fire
     Upon the heads of all our enemies.--
     And now, my lords, advance your spears again;
     Sorrow no more, my sweet Casane, now:
     Boys, leave to mourn; this town shall ever mourn,
     Being burnt to cinders for your mother's death.

     CALYPHAS.  If I had wept a sea of tears for her,
     would not ease the sorrows [110] I sustain.

     AMYRAS.  As is that town, so is my heart consum'd
     With grief and sorrow for my mother's death.

     CELEBINUS.  My mother's death hath mortified my mind,
     And sorrow stops the passage of my speech.

     TAMBURLAINE.  But now, my boys, leave off, and list to me,
     That mean to teach you rudiments of war.
     I'll have you learn to sleep upon the ground,
     March in your armour thorough watery fens,
     Sustain the scorching heat and freezing cold,
     Hunger and thirst, [111] right adjuncts of the war;
     And, after this, to scale a castle-wall,
     Besiege a fort, to undermine a town,
     And make whole cities caper in the air:
     Then next, the way to fortify your men;
     In champion [112] grounds what figure serves you best,
     For which [113] the quinque-angle form is meet,
     Because the corners there may fall more flat
     Whereas [114] the fort may fittest be assail'd,
     And sharpest where th' assault is desperate:
     The ditches must be deep; the [115] counterscarps
     Narrow and steep; the walls made high and broad;
     The bulwarks and the rampires large and strong,
     With cavalieros [116] and thick counterforts,
     And room within to lodge six thousand men;
     It must have privy ditches, countermines,
     And secret issuings to defend the ditch;
     It must have high argins [117] and cover'd ways
     To keep the bulwark-fronts from battery,
     And parapets to hide the musketeers,
     Casemates to place the great [118] artillery,
     And store of ordnance, that from every flank
     May scour the outward curtains of the fort,
     Dismount the cannon of the adverse part,
     Murder the foe, and save the [119] walls from breach.
     When this is learn'd for service on the land,
     By plain and easy demonstration
     I'll teach you how to make the water mount,
     That you may dry-foot march through lakes and pools,
     Deep rivers, havens, creeks, and little seas,
     And make a fortress in the raging waves,
     Fenc'd with the concave of a monstrous rock,
     Invincible by nature [120] of the place.
     When this is done, then are ye soldiers,
     And worthy sons of Tamburlaine the Great.

     CALYPHAS.  My lord, but this is dangerous to be done;
     We may be slain or wounded ere we learn.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Villain, art thou the son of Tamburlaine,
     And fear'st to die, or with a [121] curtle-axe
     To hew thy flesh, and make a gaping wound?
     Hast thou beheld a peal of ordnance strike
     A ring of pikes, mingled with shot and horse, [122]
     Whose shatter'd limbs, being toss'd as high as heaven,
     Hang in the air as thick as sunny motes,
     And canst thou, coward, stand in fear of death?
     Hast thou not seen my horsemen charge the foe,
     Shot through the arms, cut overthwart the hands,
     Dying their lances with their streaming blood,
     And yet at night carouse within my tent,
     Filling their empty veins with airy wine,
     That, being concocted, turns to crimson blood,
     And wilt thou shun the field for fear of wounds?
     View me, thy father, that hath conquer'd kings,
     And, with his [123] host, march'd [124] round about the earth,
     Quite void of scars and clear from any wound,
     That by the wars lost not a drop [125] of blood,
     And see him lance [126] his flesh to teach you all.
          [He cuts his arm.]
     A wound is nothing, be it ne'er so deep;
     Blood is the god of war's rich livery.
     Now look I like a soldier, and this wound
     As great a grace and majesty to me,
     As if a chair of gold enamelled,
     Enchas'd with diamonds, sapphires, rubies,
     And fairest pearl of wealthy India,
     Were mounted here under a canopy,
     And I sat down, cloth'd with a massy robe
     That late adorn'd the Afric potentate,
     Whom I brought bound unto Damascus' walls.
     Come, boys, and with your fingers search my wound,
     And in my blood wash all your hands at once,
     While I sit smiling to behold the sight.
     Now, my boys, what think ye of a wound?

     CALYPHAS.  I know not [127] what I should think of it;
     methinks 'tis a pitiful sight.

     CELEBINUS.  'Tis [128] nothing.--Give me a wound, father.

     AMYRAS.  And me another, my lord.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Come, sirrah, give me your arm.

     CELEBINUS.  Here, father, cut it bravely, as you did your own.

     TAMBURLAINE.  It shall suffice thou dar'st abide a wound;
     My boy, thou shalt not lose a drop of blood
     Before we meet the army of the Turk;
     But then run desperate through the thickest throngs,
     Dreadless of blows, of bloody wounds, and death;
     And let the burning of Larissa-walls,
     My speech of war, and this my wound you see,
     Teach you, my boys, to bear courageous minds,
     Fit for the followers of great Tamburlaine.--
     Usumcasane, now come, let us march
     Towards Techelles and Theridamas,
     That we have sent before to fire the towns,
     The towers and cities of these hateful Turks,
     And hunt that coward faint-heart runaway,
     With that accursed [129] traitor Almeda,
     Till fire and sword have found them at a bay.

     USUMCASANE.  I long to pierce his [130] bowels with my sword,
     That hath betray'd my gracious sovereign,--
     That curs'd and damned traitor Almeda.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Then let us see if coward Callapine
     Dare levy arms against our puissance,
     That we may tread upon his captive neck,
     And treble all his father's slaveries.
          [Exeunt.]




SCENE III.

          Enter TECHELLES, THERIDAMAS, and their train.

     THERIDAMAS.  Thus have we march'd northward from Tamburlaine,
     Unto the frontier point [131] of Soria; [132]
     And this is Balsera, their chiefest hold,
     Wherein is all the treasure of the land.

     TECHELLES.  Then let us bring our light artillery,
     Minions, falc'nets, and sakers, [133] to the trench,
     Filling the ditches with the walls' wide breach,
     And enter in to seize upon the hold.-- [134]
     How say you, soldiers, shall we not?

     SOLDIERS.  Yes, my lord, yes; come, let's about it.

     THERIDAMAS.  But stay a while; summon a parle, drum.
     It may be they will yield it quietly, [135]
     Knowing two kings, the friends [136] to Tamburlaine,
     Stand at the walls with such a mighty power.
          [A parley sounded.--CAPTAIN appears on the walls,
           with OLYMPIA his wife, and his SON.]

     CAPTAIN.  What require you, my masters?

     THERIDAMAS.  Captain, that thou yield up thy hold to us.

     CAPTAIN.  To you! why, do you [137] think me weary of it?

     TECHELLES.  Nay, captain, thou art weary of thy life,
     If thou withstand the friends of Tamburlaine.

     THERIDAMAS.  These pioners [138] of Argier in Africa,
     Even in [139] the cannon's face, shall raise a hill
     Of earth and faggots higher than thy fort,
     And, over thy argins [140] and cover'd ways,
     Shall play upon the bulwarks of thy hold
     Volleys of ordnance, till the breach be made
     That with his ruin fills up all the trench;
     And, when we enter in, not heaven itself
     Shall ransom thee, thy wife, and family.

     TECHELLES.  Captain, these Moors shall cut the leaden pipes
     That bring fresh water to thy men and thee,
     And lie in trench before thy castle-walls,
     That no supply of victual shall come in,
     Nor [any] issue forth but they shall die;
     And, therefore, captain, yield it quietly. [141]

     CAPTAIN.  Were you, that are the friends of Tamburlaine, [142]
     Brothers of [143] holy Mahomet himself,
     I would not yield it; therefore do your worst:
     Raise mounts, batter, intrench, and undermine,
     Cut off the water, all convoys that can, [144]
     Yet I am [145] resolute:  and so, farewell.
          [CAPTAIN, OLYMPIA, and SON, retire from the walls.]

     THERIDAMAS.  Pioners, away! and where I stuck the stake,
     Intrench with those dimensions I prescrib'd;
     Cast up the earth towards the castle-wall,
     Which, till it may defend you, labour low,
     And few or none shall perish by their shot.

     PIONERS.  We will, my lord.
          [Exeunt PIONERS.]

     TECHELLES.  A hundred horse shall scout about the plains,
     To spy what force comes to relieve the hold.
     Both we, Theridamas, will intrench our men,
     And with the Jacob's staff measure the height
     And distance of the castle from the trench,
     That we may know if our artillery
     Will carry full point-blank unto their walls.

     THERIDAMAS.  Then see the bringing of our ordnance
     Along the trench into [146] the battery,
     Where we will have gallions of six foot broad,
     To save our cannoneers from musket-shot;
     Betwixt which shall our ordnance thunder forth,
     And with the breach's fall, smoke, fire, and dust,
     The crack, the echo, and the soldiers' cry,
     Make deaf the air and dim the crystal sky.

     TECHELLES.  Trumpets and drums, alarum presently!
     And, soldiers, play the men; the hold [147] is yours!
          [Exeunt.]




SCENE IV.

          Alarms within.  Enter the CAPTAIN, with OLYMPIA, and his
          SON.

     OLYMPIA.  Come, good my lord, and let us haste from hence,
     Along the cave that leads beyond the foe:
     No hope is left to save this conquer'd hold.

     CAPTAIN.  A deadly bullet, gliding through my side,
     Lies heavy on my heart; I cannot live:
     I feel my liver pierc'd, and all my veins,
     That there begin and nourish every part,
     Mangled and torn, and all my entrails bath'd
     In blood that straineth [148] from their orifex.
     Farewell, sweet wife! sweet son, farewell! I die.
          [Dies.]

     OLYMPIA.  Death, whither art thou gone, that both we live?
     Come back again, sweet Death, and strike us both!
     One minute and our days, and one sepulchre
     Contain our bodies!  Death, why com'st thou not
     Well, this must be the messenger for thee:
          [Drawing a dagger.]
     Now, ugly Death, stretch out thy sable wings,
     And carry both our souls where his remains.--
     Tell me, sweet boy, art thou content to die?
     These barbarous Scythians, full of cruelty,
     And Moors, in whom was never pity found,
     Will hew us piecemeal, put us to the wheel,
     Or else invent some torture worse than that;
     Therefore die by thy loving mother's hand,
     Who gently now will lance thy ivory throat,
     And quickly rid thee both of pain and life.

     SON.  Mother, despatch me, or I'll kill myself;
     For think you I can live and see him dead?
     Give me your knife, good mother, or strike home: [149]
     The Scythians shall not tyrannize on me:
     Sweet mother, strike, that I may meet my father.
          [She stabs him, and he dies.]

     OLYMPIA.  Ah, sacred Mahomet, if this be sin,
     Entreat a pardon of the God of heaven,
     And purge my soul before it come to thee!
          [She burns the bodies of her HUSBAND and SON,
           and then attempts to kill herself.]

          Enter THERIDAMAS, TECHELLES, and all their train.

     THERIDAMAS.  How now, madam! what are you doing?

     OLYMPIA.  Killing myself, as I have done my son,
     Whose body, with his father's, I have burnt,
     Lest cruel Scythians should dismember him.

     TECHELLES.  'Twas bravely done, and like a soldier's wife.
     Thou shalt with us to Tamburlaine the Great,
     Who, when he hears how resolute thou wert, [150]
     Will match thee with a viceroy or a king.

     OLYMPIA.  My lord deceas'd was dearer unto me
     Than any viceroy, king, or emperor;
     And for his sake here will I end my days.

     THERIDAMAS.  But, lady, go with us to Tamburlaine,
     And thou shalt see a man greater than Mahomet,
     In whose high looks is much more majesty,
     Than from the concave superficies
     Of Jove's vast palace, the empyreal orb,
     Unto the shining bower where Cynthia sits,
     Like lovely Thetis, in a crystal robe;
     That treadeth Fortune underneath his feet,
     And makes the mighty god of arms his slave;
     On whom Death and the Fatal Sisters wait
     With naked swords and scarlet liveries;
     Before whom, mounted on a lion's back,
     Rhamnusia bears a helmet full of blood,
     And strows the way with brains of slaughter'd men;
     By whose proud side the ugly Furies run,
     Hearkening when he shall bid them plague the world;
     Over whose zenith, cloth'd in windy air,
     And eagle's wings join'd [151] to her feather'd breast,
     Fame hovereth, sounding of [152] her golden trump,
     That to the adverse poles of that straight line
     Which measureth the glorious frame of heaven
     The name of mighty Tamburlaine is spread;
     And him, fair lady, shall thy eyes behold.
     Come.

     OLYMPIA.  Take pity of a lady's ruthful tears,
     That humbly craves upon her knees to stay,
     And cast her body in the burning flame
     That feeds upon her son's and husband's flesh.

     TECHELLES.  Madam, sooner shall fire consume us both
     Than scorch a face so beautiful as this,
     In frame of which Nature hath shew'd more skill
     Than when she gave eternal chaos form,
     Drawing from it the shining lamps of heaven.

     THERIDAMAS.  Madam, I am so far in love with you,
     That you must go with us:  no remedy.

     OLYMPIA.  Then carry me, I care not, where you will,
     And let the end of this my fatal journey
     Be likewise end to my accursed life.

     TECHELLES.  No, madam, but the [153] beginning of your joy:
     Come willingly therefore.

     THERIDAMAS.  Soldiers, now let us meet the general,
     Who by this time is at Natolia,
     Ready to charge the army of the Turk.
     The gold and [154] silver, and the pearl, ye got,
     Rifling this fort, divide in equal shares:
     This lady shall have twice so much again
     Out of the coffers of our treasury.
          [Exeunt.]




SCENE V.

          Enter CALLAPINE, ORCANES, the KINGS OF JERUSALEM, TREBIZON,
          and SORIA, with their train, ALMEDA, and a MESSENGER.

     MESSENGER.  Renowmed [155] emperor, mighty [156] Callapine,
     God's great lieutenant over all the world,
     Here at Aleppo, with an host of men,
     Lies Tamburlaine, this king of Persia,
     (In number more than are the [157] quivering leaves
     Of Ida's forest, where your highness' hounds
     With open cry pursue the wounded stag,)
     Who means to girt Natolia's walls with siege,
     Fire the town, and over-run the land.

     CALLAPINE.  My royal army is as great as his,
     That, from the bounds of Phrygia to the sea
     Which washeth Cyprus with his brinish waves,
     Covers the hills, the valleys, and the plains.
     Viceroys and peers of Turkey, play the men;
     Whet all your [158] swords to mangle Tamburlaine,
     His sons, his captains, and his followers:
     By Mahomet, not one of them shall live!
     The field wherein this battle shall be fought
     For ever term'd [159] the Persians' sepulchre,
     In memory of this our victory.

     ORCANES.  Now he that calls himself the [160] scourge of Jove,
     The emperor of the world, and earthly god,
     Shall end the warlike progress he intends,
     And travel headlong to the lake of hell,
     Where legions of devils (knowing he must die
     Here in Natolia by your [161] highness' hands),
     All brandishing their [162] brands of quenchless fire,
     Stretching their monstrous paws, grin with [163] their teeth,
     And guard the gates to entertain his soul.

     CALLAPINE.  Tell me, viceroys, the number of your men,
     And what our army royal is esteem'd.

     KING OF JERUSALEM.  From Palestina and Jerusalem,
     Of Hebrews three score thousand fighting men
     Are come, since last we shew'd your [164] majesty.

     ORCANES.  So from Arabia Desert, and the bounds
     Of that sweet land whose brave metropolis
     Re-edified the fair Semiramis,
     Came forty thousand warlike foot and horse,
     Since last we number'd to your majesty.

     KING OF TREBIZON.  From Trebizon in Asia the Less,
     Naturaliz'd Turks and stout Bithynians
     Came to my bands, full fifty thousand more,
     (That, fighting, know not what retreat doth mean,
     Nor e'er return but with the victory,)
     Since last we number'd to your majesty.

     KING OF SORIA.  Of Sorians [165] from Halla is repair'd, [166]
     And neighbour cities of your highness' land, [167]
     Ten thousand horse, and thirty thousand foot,
     Since last we number'd to your majesty;
     So that the army royal is esteem'd
     Six hundred thousand valiant fighting men.

     CALLAPINE.  Then welcome, Tamburlaine, unto thy death!--
     Come, puissant viceroys, let us to the field
     (The Persians' sepulchre), and sacrifice
     Mountains of breathless men to Mahomet,
     Who now, with Jove, opens the firmament
     To see the slaughter of our enemies.

          Enter TAMBURLAINE with his three SONS, CALYPHAS, AMYRAS,
          and CELEBINUS; USUMCASANE, and others.

     TAMBURLAINE.  How now, Casane! see, a knot of kings,
     Sitting as if they were a-telling riddles!

     USUMCASANE.  My lord, your presence makes them pale and wan:
     Poor souls, they look as if their deaths were near.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Why, so he [168] is, Casane; I am here:
     But yet I'll save their lives, and make them slaves.--
     Ye petty kings of Turkey, I am come,
     As Hector did into the Grecian camp,
     To overdare the pride of Graecia,
     And set his warlike person to the view
     Of fierce Achilles, rival of his fame:
     I do you honour in the simile;
     For, if I should, as Hector did Achilles,
     (The worthiest knight that ever brandish'd sword,)
     Challenge in combat any of you all,
     I see how fearfully ye would refuse,
     And fly my glove as from a scorpion.

     ORCANES.  Now, thou art fearful of thy army's strength,
     Thou wouldst with overmatch of person fight:
     But, shepherd's issue, base-born Tamburlaine,
     Think of thy end; this sword shall lance thy throat.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Villain, the shepherd's issue (at whose birth
     Heaven did afford a gracious aspect,
     And join'd those stars that shall be opposite
     Even till the dissolution of the world,
     And never meant to make a conqueror
     So famous as is [169] mighty Tamburlaine)
     Shall so torment thee, and that Callapine,
     That, like a roguish runaway, suborn'd
     That villain there, that slave, that Turkish dog,
     To false his service to his sovereign,
     As ye shall curse the birth of Tamburlaine.

     CALLAPINE.  Rail not, proud Scythian:  I shall now revenge
     My father's vile abuses and mine own.

     KING OF JERUSALEM.  By Mahomet, he shall be tied in chains,
     Rowing with Christians in a brigandine
     About the Grecian isles to rob and spoil,
     And turn him to his ancient trade again:
     Methinks the slave should make a lusty thief.

     CALLAPINE.  Nay, when the battle ends, all we will meet,
     And sit in council to invent some pain
     That most may vex his body and his soul.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Sirrah Callapine, I'll hang a clog about
     your neck for running away again:  you shall not
     trouble me thus to come and fetch you.--
     But as for you, viceroy[s], you shall have bits,
     And, harness'd [170] like my horses, draw my coach;
     And, when ye stay, be lash'd with whips of wire:
     I'll have you learn to feed on [171] provender,
     And in a stable lie upon the planks.

     ORCANES.  But, Tamburlaine, first thou shalt [172] kneel to us,
     And humbly crave a pardon for thy life.

     KING OF TREBIZON.  The common soldiers of our mighty host
     Shall bring thee bound unto the [173] general's tent [.]

     KING OF SORIA.  And all have jointly sworn thy cruel death,
     Or bind thee in eternal torments' wrath.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Well, sirs, diet yourselves; you know I
     shall have occasion shortly to journey you.

     CELEBINUS.  See, father, how Almeda the jailor looks upon us!

     TAMBURLAINE.  Villain, traitor, damned fugitive,
     I'll make thee wish the earth had swallow'd thee!
     See'st thou not death within my wrathful looks?
     Go, villain, cast thee headlong from a rock,
     Or rip thy bowels, and rent [174] out thy heart,
     T' appease my wrath; or else I'll torture thee,
     Searing thy hateful flesh with burning irons
     And drops of scalding lead, while all thy joints
     Be rack'd and beat asunder with the wheel;
     For, if thou liv'st, not any element
     Shall shroud thee from the wrath of Tamburlaine.

     CALLAPINE.  Well, in despite of thee, he shall be king.--
     Come, Almeda; receive this crown of me:
     I here invest thee king of Ariadan,
     Bordering on Mare Roso, near to Mecca.

     ORCANES.  What! take it, man.

     ALMEDA.  [to Tamb.] Good my lord, let me take it.

     CALLAPINE.  Dost thou ask him leave? here; take it.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Go to, sirrah! [175] take your crown, and make up
     the half dozen.  So, sirrah, now you are a king, you must give
     arms. [176]

     ORCANES.  So he shall, and wear thy head in his scutcheon.

     TAMBURLAINE.  No; [177] let him hang a bunch of keys on his
     standard, to put him in remembrance he was a jailor, that,
     when I take him, I may knock out his brains with them,
     and lock you in the stable, when you shall come sweating
     from my chariot.

     KING OF TREBIZON.  Away! let us to the field, that the villain
     may be slain.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Sirrah, prepare whips, and bring my chariot
     to my tent; for, as soon as the battle is done, I'll ride
     in triumph through the camp.
          Enter THERIDAMAS, TECHELLES, and their train.
     How now, ye petty kings? lo, here are bugs [178]
     Will make the hair stand upright on your heads,
     And cast your crowns in slavery at their feet!--
     Welcome, Theridamas and Techelles, both:
     See ye this rout, [179] and know ye this same king?

     THERIDAMAS.  Ay, my lord; he was Callapine's keeper.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Well, now ye see he is a king.  Look to him,
     Theridamas, when we are fighting, lest he hide his crown
     as the foolish king of Persia did. [180]

     KING OF SORIA.  No, Tamburlaine; he shall not be put
     to that exigent, I warrant thee.

     TAMBURLAINE.  You know not, sir.--
     But now, my followers and my loving friends,
     Fight as you ever did, like conquerors,
     The glory of this happy day is yours.
     My stern aspect [181] shall make fair Victory,
     Hovering betwixt our armies, light on me,
     Loaden with laurel-wreaths to crown us all.

     TECHELLES.  I smile to think how, when this field is fought
     And rich Natolia ours, our men shall sweat
     With carrying pearl and treasure on their backs.

     TAMBURLAINE.  You shall be princes all, immediately.--
     Come, fight, ye Turks, or yield us victory.

     ORCANES.  No; we will meet thee, slavish Tamburlaine.
          [Exeunt severally.]




ACT IV.




SCENE I.

          Alarms within.  AMYRAS and CELEBINUS issue from the tent
          where CALYPHAS sits asleep. [182]

     AMYRAS.  Now in their glories shine the golden crowns
     Of these proud Turks, much like so many suns
     That half dismay the majesty of heaven.
     Now, brother, follow we our father's sword,
     That flies with fury swifter than our thoughts,
     And cuts down armies with his conquering wings.

     CELEBINUS.  Call forth our lazy brother from the tent,
     For, if my father miss him in the field,
     Wrath, kindled in the furnace of his breast,
     Will send a deadly lightning to his heart.

     AMYRAS.  Brother, ho! what, given so much to sleep,
     You cannot [183] leave it, when our enemies' drums
     And rattling cannons thunder in our ears
     Our proper ruin and our father's foil?

     CALYPHAS.  Away, ye fools! my father needs not me,
     Nor you, in faith, but that you will be thought
     More childish-valourous than manly-wise.
     If half our camp should sit and sleep with me,
     My father were enough to scare [184] the foe:
     You do dishonour to his majesty,
     To think our helps will do him any good.

     AMYRAS.  What, dar'st thou, then, be absent from the fight,
     Knowing my father hates thy cowardice,
     And oft hath warn'd thee to be still in field,
     When he himself amidst the thickest troops
     Beats down our foes, to flesh our taintless swords?

     CALYPHAS.  I know, sir, what it is to kill a man;
     It works remorse of conscience in me.
     I take no pleasure to be murderous,
     Nor care for blood when wine will quench my thirst.

     CELEBINUS.  O cowardly boy! fie, for shame, come forth!
     Thou dost dishonour manhood and thy house.

     CALYPHAS.  Go, go, tall [185] stripling, fight you for us both,
     And take my other toward brother here,
     For person like to prove a second Mars.
     'Twill please my mind as well to hear, both you [186]
     Have won a heap of honour in the field,
     And left your slender carcasses behind,
     As if I lay with you for company.

     AMYRAS.  You will not go, then?

     CALYPHAS.  You say true.

     AMYRAS.  Were all the lofty mounts of Zona Mundi
     That fill the midst of farthest Tartary
     Turn'd into pearl and proffer'd for my stay,
     I would not bide the fury of my father,
     When, made a victor in these haughty arms,
     He comes and finds his sons have had no shares
     In all the honours he propos'd for us.

     CALYPHAS.  Take you the honour, I will take my ease;
     My wisdom shall excuse my cowardice:
     I go into the field before I need!
          [Alarms within.  AMYRAS and CELEBINUS run out.]
     The bullets fly at random where they list;
     And, should I [187] go, and kill a thousand men,
     I were as soon rewarded with a shot,
     And sooner far than he that never fights;
     And, should I go, and do no harm nor good,
     I might have harm, which all the good I have,
     Join'd with my father's crown, would never cure.
     I'll to cards.--Perdicas!

          Enter PERDICAS.

     PERDICAS.  Here, my lord.

     CALYPHAS.
     Come, thou and I will go to cards to drive away the time.

     PERDICAS.  Content, my lord:  but what shall we play for?

     CALYPHAS.  Who shall kiss the fairest of the Turks' concubines
     first, when my father hath conquered them.

     PERDICAS.  Agreed, i'faith.
          [They play.]

     CALYPHAS.  They say I am a coward, Perdicas, and I fear
     as little their taratantaras, their swords, or their cannons
     as I do a naked lady in a net of gold, and, for fear I should be
     afraid, would put it off and come to bed with me.

     PERDICAS.  Such a fear, my lord, would never make ye retire.

     CALYPHAS.  I would my father would let me be put in the front
     of such a battle once, to try my valour!  [Alarms within.]
     What a coil they keep!  I believe there will be some hurt done
     anon amongst them.

          Enter TAMBURLAINE, THERIDAMAS, TECHELLES, USUMCASANE;
          AMYRAS and CELEBINUS leading in ORCANES, and the KINGS
          OF JERUSALEM, TREBIZON, and SORIA; and SOLDIERS.

     TAMBURLAINE.
     See now, ye [188] slaves, my children stoop your pride, [189]
     And lead your bodies [190] sheep-like to the sword!--
     Bring them, my boys, and tell me if the wars
     Be not a life that may illustrate gods,
     And tickle not your spirits with desire
     Still to be train'd in arms and chivalry?

     AMYRAS.  Shall we let go these kings again, my lord,
     To gather greater numbers 'gainst our power,
     That they may say, it is not chance doth this,
     But matchless strength and magnanimity?

     TAMBURLAINE.  No, no, Amyras; tempt not Fortune so:
     Cherish thy valour still with fresh supplies,
     And glut it not with stale and daunted foes.
     But where's this coward villain, not my son,
     But traitor to my name and majesty?
          [He goes in and brings CALYPHAS out.]
     Image of sloth, and picture of a slave,
     The obloquy and scorn of my renown!
     How may my heart, thus fired with mine [191] eyes,
     Wounded with shame and kill'd with discontent,
     Shroud any thought may [192] hold my striving hands
     ]From martial justice on thy wretched soul?

     THERIDAMAS.  Yet pardon him, I pray your majesty.

     TECHELLES and USUMCASANE.
     Let all of us entreat your highness' pardon.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Stand up, [193] ye base, unworthy soldiers!
     Know ye not yet the argument of arms?

     AMYRAS.  Good my lord, let him be forgiven for once, [194]
     And we will force him to the field hereafter.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Stand up, my boys, and I will teach ye arms,
     And what the jealousy of wars must do.--
     O Samarcanda, where I breathed first,
     And joy'd the fire of this martial [195] flesh,
     Blush, blush, fair city, at thine [196] honour's foil,
     And shame of nature, which [197] Jaertis' [198] stream,
     Embracing thee with deepest of his love,
     Can never wash from thy distained brows!--
     Here, Jove, receive his fainting soul again;
     A form not meet to give that subject essence
     Whose matter is the flesh of Tamburlaine,
     Wherein an incorporeal [199] spirit moves,
     Made of the mould whereof thyself consists,
     Which makes me valiant, proud, ambitious,
     Ready to levy power against thy throne,
     That I might move the turning spheres of heaven;
     For earth and all this airy region
     Cannot contain the state of Tamburlaine.
          [Stabs CALYPHAS.]
     By Mahomet, thy mighty friend, I swear,
     In sending to my issue such a soul,
     Created of the massy dregs of earth,
     The scum and tartar of the elements,
     Wherein was neither courage, strength, or wit,
     But folly, sloth, and damned idleness,
     Thou hast procur'd a greater enemy
     Than he that darted mountains at thy head,
     Shaking the burden mighty Atlas bears,
     Whereat thou trembling hidd'st thee in the air,
     Cloth'd with a pitchy cloud for being seen.-- [200]
     And now, ye canker'd curs of Asia,
     That will not see the strength of Tamburlaine,
     Although it shine as brightly as the sun,
     Now you shall [201] feel the strength of Tamburlaine,
     And, by the state of his supremacy,
     Approve [202] the difference 'twixt himself and you.

     ORCANES.  Thou shew'st the difference 'twixt ourselves and thee,
     In this thy barbarous damned tyranny.

     KING OF JERUSALEM.  Thy victories are grown so violent,
     That shortly heaven, fill'd with the meteors
     Of blood and fire thy tyrannies have made,
     Will pour down blood and fire on thy head,
     Whose scalding drops will pierce thy seething brains,
     And, with our bloods, revenge our bloods [203] on thee.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Villains, these terrors, and these tyrannies
     (If tyrannies war's justice ye repute),
     I execute, enjoin'd me from above,
     To scourge the pride of such as Heaven abhors;
     Nor am I made arch-monarch of the world,
     Crown'd and invested by the hand of Jove,
     For deeds of bounty or nobility;
     But, since I exercise a greater name,
     The scourge of God and terror of the world,
     I must apply myself to fit those terms,
     In war, in blood, in death, in cruelty,
     And plague such peasants [204] as resist in [205] me
     The power of Heaven's eternal majesty.--
     Theridamas, Techelles, and Casane, [206]
     Ransack the tents and the pavilions
     Of these proud Turks, and take their concubines,
     Making them bury this effeminate brat;
     For not a common soldier shall defile
     His manly fingers with so faint a boy:
     Then bring those Turkish harlots to my tent,
     And I'll dispose them as it likes me best.--
     Meanwhile, take him in.

     SOLDIERS.  We will, my lord.
          [Exeunt with the body of CALYPHAS.]

     KING OF JERUSALEM.  O damned monster! nay, a fiend of hell,
     Whose cruelties are not so harsh as thine,
     Nor yet impos'd with such a bitter hate!

     ORCANES.  Revenge it, [207] Rhadamanth and Aeacus,
     And let your hates, extended in his pains,
     Excel [208] the hate wherewith he pains our souls!

     KING OF TREBIZON.  May never day give virtue to his eyes,
     Whose sight, compos'd of fury and of fire,
     Doth send such stern affections to his heart!

     KING OF SORIA.  May never spirit, vein, or artier, [209] feed
     The cursed substance of that cruel heart;
     But, wanting moisture and remorseful [210] blood,
     Dry up with anger, and consume with heat!

     TAMBURLAINE.  Well, bark, ye dogs:  I'll bridle all your tongues,
     And bind them close with bits of burnish'd steel,
     Down to the channels of your hateful throats;
     And, with the pains my rigour shall inflict,
     I'll make ye roar, that earth may echo forth
     The far-resounding torments ye sustain;
     As when an herd of lusty Cimbrian bulls
     Run mourning round about the females' miss, [211]
     And, stung with fury of their following,
     Fill all the air with troublous bellowing.
     I will, with engines never exercis'd,
     Conquer, sack, and utterly consume
     Your cities and your golden palaces,
     And, with the flames that beat against the clouds,
     Incense the heavens, and make the stars to melt,
     As if they were the tears of Mahomet
     For hot consumption of his country's pride;
     And, till by vision or by speech I hear
     Immortal Jove say "Cease, my Tamburlaine,"
     I will persist a terror to the world,
     Making the meteors (that, like armed men,
     Are seen to march upon the towers of heaven)
     Run tilting round about the firmament,
     And break their burning lances in the air,
     For honour of my wondrous victories.--
     Come, bring them in to our pavilion.
          [Exeunt.]




SCENE II.

          Enter OLYMPIA.

     OLYMPIA.  Distress'd Olympia, whose weeping eyes,
     Since thy arrival here, behold [212] no sun,
     But, clos'd within the compass of a [213] tent,
     Have [214] stain'd thy cheeks, and made thee look like death,
     Devise some means to rid thee of thy life,
     Rather than yield to his detested suit,
     Whose drift is only to dishonour thee;
     And, since this earth, dew'd with thy brinish tears,
     Affords no herbs whose taste may poison thee,
     Nor yet this air, beat often with thy sighs,
     Contagious smells and vapours to infect thee,
     Nor thy close cave a sword to murder thee,
     Let this invention be the instrument.

          Enter THERIDAMAS.

     THERIDAMAS.  Well met, Olympia:  I sought thee in my tent,
     But, when I saw the place obscure and dark,
     Which with thy beauty thou wast wont to light,
     Enrag'd, I ran about the fields for thee,
     Supposing amorous Jove had sent his son,
     The winged Hermes, to convey thee hence;
     But now I find thee, and that fear is past,
     Tell me, Olympia, wilt thou grant my suit?

     OLYMPIA.  My lord and husband's death, with my sweet son's,
     (With whom I buried all affections
     Save grief and sorrow, which torment my heart,)
     Forbids my mind to entertain a thought
     That tends to love, but meditate on death,
     A fitter subject for a pensive soul.

     THERIDAMAS.  Olympia, pity him in whom thy looks
     Have greater operation and more force
     Than Cynthia's in the watery wilderness;
     For with thy view my joys are at the full,
     And ebb again as thou depart'st from me.

     OLYMPIA.  Ah, pity me, my lord, and draw your sword,
     Making a passage for my troubled soul,
     Which beats against this prison to get out,
     And meet my husband and my loving son!

     THERIDAMAS.  Nothing but still thy husband and thy son?
     Leave this, my love, and listen more to me:
     Thou shalt be stately queen of fair Argier;
     And, cloth'd in costly cloth of massy gold,
     Upon the marble turrets of my court
     Sit like to Venus in her chair of state,
     Commanding all thy princely eye desires;
     And I will cast off arms to [215] sit with thee,
     Spending my life in sweet discourse of love.

     OLYMPIA.  No such discourse is pleasant in [216] mine ears,
     But that where every period ends with death,
     And every line begins with death again:
     I cannot love, to be an emperess.

     THERIDAMAS.  Nay, lady, then, if nothing will prevail,
     I'll use some other means to make you yield:
     Such is the sudden fury of my love,
     I must and will be pleas'd, and you shall yield:
     Come to the tent again.

     OLYMPIA.  Stay now, my lord; and, will you [217] save my honour,
     I'll give your grace a present of such price
     As all the world can not afford the like.

     THERIDAMAS.  What is it?

     OLYMPIA.  An ointment which a cunning alchymist
     Distilled from the purest balsamum
     And simplest extracts of all minerals,
     In which the essential form of marble stone,
     Temper'd by science metaphysical,
     And spells of magic from the mouths [218] of spirits,
     With which if you but 'noint your tender skin,
     Nor pistol, sword, nor lance, can pierce your flesh.

     THERIDAMAS.  Why, madam, think you to mock me thus palpably?

     OLYMPIA.  To prove it, I will 'noint my naked throat,
     Which when you stab, look on your weapon's point,
     And you shall see't rebated [219] with the blow.

     THERIDAMAS.  Why gave you not your husband some of it,
     If you lov'd him, and it so precious?

     OLYMPIA.  My purpose was, my lord, to spend it so,
     But was prevented by his sudden end;
     And for a present easy proof thereof, [220]
     That I dissemble not, try it on me.

     THERIDAMAS.  I will, Olympia, and will [221] keep it for
     The richest present of this eastern world.
          [She anoints her throat. [222]]

     OLYMPIA.  Now stab, my lord, and mark your weapon's point,
     That will be blunted if the blow be great.

     THERIDAMAS.  Here, then, Olympia.--
          [Stabs her.]
     What, have I slain her?  Villain, stab thyself!
     Cut off this arm that at murdered my [223] love,
     In whom the learned Rabbis of this age
     Might find as many wondrous miracles
     As in the theoria of the world!
     Now hell is fairer than Elysium; [224]
     A greater lamp than that bright eye of heaven,
     ]From whence the stars do borrow [225] all their light,
     Wanders about the black circumference;
     And now the damned souls are free from pain,
     For every Fury gazeth on her looks;
     Infernal Dis is courting of my love,
     Inventing masks and stately shows for her,
     Opening the doors of his rich treasury
     To entertain this queen of chastity;
     Whose body shall be tomb'd with all the pomp
     The treasure of my [226] kingdom may afford.
          [Exit with the body.]




SCENE III.

          Enter TAMBURLAINE, drawn in his chariot by the KINGS OF
          TREBIZON and SORIA, [227] with bits in their mouths,
          reins in his [228] left hand, and in his right hand a whip
          with which he scourgeth them; AMYRAS, CELEBINUS, TECHELLES,
          THERIDAMAS, USUMCASANE; ORCANES king of Natolia, and the
          KING OF JERUSALEM, led by five [229] or six common SOLDIERS;
          and other SOLDIERS.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Holla, ye pamper'd jades of Asia! [230]
     What, can ye draw but twenty miles a-day,
     And have so proud a chariot at your heels,
     And such a coachman as great Tamburlaine,
     But from Asphaltis, where I conquer'd you,
     To Byron here, where thus I honour you?
     The horse that guide the golden eye of heaven,
     And blow the morning from their nostrils, [231]
     Making their fiery gait above the clouds,
     Are not so honour'd in [232] their governor
     As you, ye slaves, in mighty Tamburlaine.
     The headstrong jades of Thrace Alcides tam'd,
     That King Aegeus fed with human flesh,
     And made so wanton that they knew their strengths,
     Were not subdu'd with valour more divine
     Than you by this unconquer'd arm of mine.
     To make you fierce, and fit my appetite,
     You shall be fed with flesh as raw as blood,
     And drink in pails the strongest muscadel:
     If you can live with it, then live, and draw
     My chariot swifter than the racking [233] clouds;
     If not, then die like beasts, and fit for naught
     But perches for the black and fatal ravens.
     Thus am I right the scourge of highest Jove;
     And see the figure of my dignity,
     By which I hold my name and majesty!

     AMYRAS.  Let me have coach, [234] my lord, that I may ride,
     And thus be drawn by [235] these two idle kings.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Thy youth forbids such ease, my kingly boy:
     They shall to-morrow draw my chariot,
     While these their fellow-kings may be refresh'd.

     ORCANES.  O thou that sway'st the region under earth,
     And art a king as absolute as Jove,
     Come as thou didst in fruitful Sicily,
     Surveying all the glories of the land,
     And as thou took'st the fair Proserpina,
     Joying the fruit of Ceres' garden-plot, [236]
     For love, for honour, and to make her queen,
     So, for just hate, for shame, and to subdue
     This proud contemner of thy dreadful power,
     Come once in fury, and survey his pride,
     Haling him headlong to the lowest hell!

     THERIDAMAS.  Your majesty must get some bits for these,
     To bridle their contemptuous cursing tongues,
     That, like unruly never-broken jades,
     Break through the hedges of their hateful mouths,
     And pass their fixed bounds exceedingly.

     TECHELLES.  Nay, we will break the hedges of their mouths,
     And pull their kicking colts [237] out of their pastures.

     USUMCASANE.  Your majesty already hath devis'd
     A mean, as fit as may be, to restrain
     These coltish coach-horse tongues from blasphemy.

     CELEBINUS.  How like you that, sir king? why speak you not?

     KING OF JERUSALEM.  Ah, cruel brat, sprung from a tyrant's loins!
     How like his cursed father he begins
     To practice taunts and bitter tyrannies!

     TAMBURLAINE.  Ay, Turk, I tell thee, this same [238] boy is he
     That must (advanc'd in higher pomp than this)
     Rifle the kingdoms I shall leave unsack'd,
     If Jove, esteeming me too good for earth,
     Raise me, to match [239] the fair Aldeboran,
     Above [240] the threefold astracism of heaven,
     Before I conquer all the triple world.--
     Now fetch me out the Turkish concubines:
     I will prefer them for the funeral
     They have bestow'd on my abortive son.
          [The CONCUBINES are brought in.]
     Where are my common soldiers now, that fought
     So lion-like upon Asphaltis' plains?

     SOLDIERS.  Here, my lord.

     TAMBURLAINE.
     Hold ye, tall [241] soldiers, take ye queens a-piece,--
     I mean such queens as were kings' concubines;
     Take them; divide them, and their [242] jewels too,
     And let them equally serve all your turns.

     SOLDIERS.  We thank your majesty.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Brawl not, I warn you, for your lechery;
     For every man that so offends shall die.

     ORCANES.  Injurious tyrant, wilt thou so defame
     The hateful fortunes of thy victory,
     To exercise upon such guiltless dames
     The violence of thy common soldiers' lust?

     TAMBURLAINE.
     Live continent, [243] then, ye slaves, and meet not me
     With troops of harlots at your slothful heels.

     CONCUBINES.  O, pity us, my lord, and save our honours!

     TAMBURLAINE.  Are ye not gone, ye villains, with your spoils?
          [The SOLDIERS run away with the CONCUBINES.]

     KING OF JERUSALEM.  O, merciless, infernal cruelty!

     TAMBURLAINE.  Save your honours! 'twere but time indeed,
     Lost long before ye knew what honour meant.

     THERIDAMAS.  It seems they meant to conquer us, my lord,
     And make us jesting pageants for their trulls.

     TAMBURLAINE.  And now themselves shall make our pageant,
     And common soldiers jest [244] with all their trulls.
     Let them take pleasure soundly in their spoils,
     Till we prepare our march to Babylon,
     Whither we next make expedition.

     TECHELLES.  Let us not be idle, then, my lord,
     But presently be prest [245] to conquer it.

     TAMBURLAINE.  We will, Techelles.--Forward, then, ye jades!
     Now crouch, ye kings of greatest Asia,
     And tremble, when ye hear this scourge will come
     That whips down cities and controlleth crowns,
     Adding their wealth and treasure to my store.
     The Euxine sea, north to Natolia;
     The Terrene, [246] west; the Caspian, north northeast;
     And on the south, Sinus Arabicus;
     Shall all [247] be loaden with the martial spoils
     We will convey with us to Persia.
     Then shall my native city Samarcanda,
     And crystal waves of fresh Jaertis' [248] stream,
     The pride and beauty of her princely seat,
     Be famous through the furthest [249] continents;
     For there my palace royal shall be plac'd,
     Whose shining turrets shall dismay the heavens,
     And cast the fame of Ilion's tower to hell:
     Thorough [250] the streets, with troops of conquer'd kings,
     I'll ride in golden armour like the sun;
     And in my helm a triple plume shall spring,
     Spangled with diamonds, dancing in the air,
     To note me emperor of the three-fold world;
     Like to an almond-tree [251] y-mounted [252] high
     Upon the lofty and celestial mount
     Of ever-green Selinus, [253] quaintly deck'd
     With blooms more white than Erycina's [254] brows, [255]
     Whose tender blossoms tremble every one
     At every little breath that thorough heaven [256] is blown.
     Then in my coach, like Saturn's royal son
     Mounted his shining chariot [257] gilt with fire,
     And drawn with princely eagles through the path
     Pav'd with bright crystal and enchas'd with stars,
     When all the gods stand gazing at his pomp,
     So will I ride through Samarcanda-streets,
     Until my soul, dissever'd from this flesh,
     Shall mount the milk-white way, and meet him there.
     To Babylon, my lords, to Babylon!
          [Exeunt.]




ACT V.




SCENE I.

          Enter the GOVERNOR OF BABYLON, MAXIMUS, and others, upon
          the walls.

     GOVERNOR.  What saith Maximus?

     MAXIMUS.  My lord, the breach the enemy hath made
     Gives such assurance of our overthrow,
     That little hope is left to save our lives,
     Or hold our city from the conqueror's hands.
     Then hang out [258] flags, my lord, of humble truce,
     And satisfy the people's general prayers,
     That Tamburlaine's intolerable wrath
     May be suppress'd by our submission.

     GOVERNOR.  Villain, respect'st thou [259] more thy slavish life
     Than honour of thy country or thy name?
     Is not my life and state as dear to me,
     The city and my native country's weal,
     As any thing of [260] price with thy conceit?
     Have we not hope, for all our batter'd walls,
     To live secure and keep his forces out,
     When this our famous lake of Limnasphaltis
     Makes walls a-fresh with every thing that falls
     Into the liquid substance of his stream,
     More strong than are the gates of death or hell?
     What faintness should dismay our courages,
     When we are thus defenc'd against our foe,
     And have no terror but his threatening looks?

          Enter, above, a CITIZEN, who kneels to the GOVERNOR.

     CITIZEN.  My lord, if ever you did deed of ruth,
     And now will work a refuge to our lives,
     Offer submission, hang up flags of truce,
     That Tamburlaine may pity our distress,
     And use us like a loving conqueror.
     Though this be held his last day's dreadful siege,
     Wherein he spareth neither man nor child,
     Yet are there Christians of Georgia here,
     Whose state he [261] ever pitied and reliev'd,
     Will get his pardon, if your grace would send.

     GOVERNOR.  How [262] is my soul environed!
     And this eterniz'd [263] city Babylon
     Fill'd with a pack of faint-heart fugitives
     That thus entreat their shame and servitude!

          Enter, above, a SECOND CITIZEN.

     SECOND CITIZEN.  My lord, if ever you will win our hearts,
     Yield up the town, and [264] save our wives and children;
     For I will cast myself from off these walls,
     Or die some death of quickest violence,
     Before I bide the wrath of Tamburlaine.

     GOVERNOR.  Villains, cowards, traitors to our state!
     Fall to the earth, and pierce the pit of hell,
     That legions of tormenting spirits may vex
     Your slavish bosoms with continual pains!
     I care not, nor the town will never yield
     As long as any life is in my breast.

          Enter THERIDAMAS and TECHELLES, with SOLDIERS.

     THERIDAMAS.  Thou desperate governor of Babylon,
     To save thy life, and us a little labour,
     Yield speedily the city to our hands,
     Or else be sure thou shalt be forc'd with pains
     More exquisite than ever traitor felt.

     GOVERNOR.  Tyrant, I turn the traitor in thy throat,
     And will defend it in despite of thee.--
     Call up the soldiers to defend these walls.

     TECHELLES.  Yield, foolish governor; we offer more
     Than ever yet we did to such proud slaves
     As durst resist us till our third day's siege.
     Thou seest us prest [265] to give the last assault,
     And that shall bide no more regard of parle. [266]

     GOVERNOR.  Assault and spare not; we will never yield.
          [Alarms:  and they scale the walls.]

          Enter TAMBURLAINE, drawn in his chariot (as before) by the
          KINGS OF TREBIZON and SORIA; AMYRAS, CELEBINUS, USUMCASANE;
          ORCANES king of Natolia, and the KING OF JERUSALEM, led by
          SOLDIERS; [267] and others.

     TAMBURLAINE.  The stately buildings of fair Babylon,
     Whose lofty pillars, higher than the clouds,
     Were wont to guide the seaman in the deep,
     Being carried thither by the cannon's force,
     Now fill the mouth of Limnasphaltis' lake,
     And make a bridge unto the batter'd walls.
     Where Belus, Ninus, and great Alexander
     Have rode in triumph, triumphs Tamburlaine,
     Whose chariot-wheels have burst [268] th' Assyrians' bones,
     Drawn with these kings on heaps of carcasses.
     Now in the place, where fair Semiramis,
     Courted by kings and peers of Asia,
     Hath trod the measures, [269] do my soldiers march;
     And in the streets, where brave Assyrian dames
     Have rid in pomp like rich Saturnia,
     With furious words and frowning visages
     My horsemen brandish their unruly blades.
          Re-enter THERIDAMAS and TECHELLES, bringing in the
          GOVERNOR OF BABYLON.
     Who have ye there, my lords?

     THERIDAMAS.  The sturdy governor of Babylon,
     That made us all the labour for the town,
     And us'd such slender reckoning of [270] your majesty.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Go, bind the villain; he shall hang in chains
     Upon the ruins of this conquer'd town.--
     Sirrah, the view of our vermilion tents
     (Which threaten'd more than if the region
     Next underneath the element of fire
     Were full of comets and of blazing stars,
     Whose flaming trains should reach down to the earth)
     Could not affright you; no, nor I myself,
     The wrathful messenger of mighty Jove,
     That with his sword hath quail'd all earthly kings,
     Could not persuade you to submission,
     But still the ports [271] were shut:  villain, I say,
     Should I but touch the rusty gates of hell,
     The triple-headed Cerberus would howl,
     And make [272] black Jove to crouch and kneel to me;
     But I have sent volleys of shot to you,
     Yet could not enter till the breach was made.

     GOVERNOR.  Nor, if my body could have stopt the breach,
     Shouldst thou have enter'd, cruel Tamburlaine.
     'Tis not thy bloody tents can make me yield,
     Nor yet thyself, the anger of the Highest;
     For, though thy cannon shook the city-walls, [273]
     My heart did never quake, or courage faint.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Well, now I'll make it quake.--Go draw him [274] up,
     Hang him in [275] chains upon the city-walls,
     And let my soldiers shoot the slave to death.

     GOVERNOR.  Vile monster, born of some infernal hag,
     And sent from hell to tyrannize on earth,
     Do all thy worst; nor death, nor Tamburlaine,
     Torture, or pain, can daunt my dreadless mind.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Up with him, then! his body shall be scar'd. [276]

     GOVERNOR.  But, Tamburlaine, in Limnasphaltis' lake
     There lies more gold than Babylon is worth,
     Which, when the city was besieg'd, I hid:
     Save but my life, and I will give it thee.

     TAMBURLAINE.
     Then, for all your valour, you would save your life?
     Whereabout lies it?

     GOVERNOR.  Under a hollow bank, right opposite
     Against the western gate of Babylon.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Go thither, some of you, and take his gold:--
          [Exeunt some ATTENDANTS.]
     The rest forward with execution.
     Away with him hence, let him speak no more.--
     I think I make your courage something quail.--
          [Exeunt ATTENDANTS with the GOVERNOR or BABYLON.]
     When this is done, we'll march from Babylon,
     And make our greatest haste to Persia.
     These jades are broken-winded and half-tir'd;
     Unharness them, and let me have fresh horse.
          [ATTENDANTS unharness the KINGS or TREBIZON and SORIA]
     So; now their best is done to honour me,
     Take them and hang them both up presently.

     KING OF TREBIZON.
     Vile [277] tyrant! barbarous bloody Tamburlaine!

     TAMBURLAINE.  Take them away, Theridamas; see them despatch'd.

     THERIDAMAS.  I will, my lord.
          [Exit with the KINGS or TREBIZON and SORIA.]

     TAMBURLAINE.  Come, Asian viceroys; to your tasks a while,
     And take such fortune as your fellows felt.

     ORCANES.  First let thy Scythian horse tear both our limbs,
     Rather than we should draw thy chariot,
     And, like base slaves, abject our princely minds
     To vile and ignominious servitude.

     KING OF JERUSALEM.  Rather lend me thy weapon, Tamburlaine,
     That I may sheathe it in this breast of mine.
     A thousand deaths could not torment our hearts
     More than the thought of this doth vex our souls.

     AMYRAS.
     They will talk still, my lord, if you do not bridle them.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Bridle them, and let me to my coach.

          [ATTENDANTS bridle ORCANES king of Natolia, and the
          KING OF JERUSALEM, and harness them to the chariot.--
          The GOVERNOR OF BABYLON appears hanging in chains
          on the walls.--Re-enter THERIDAMAS.]

     AMYRAS.  See, now, my lord, how brave the captain hangs!

     TAMBURLAINE.  'Tis brave indeed, my boy:--well done!--
     Shoot first, my lord, and then the rest shall follow.

     THERIDAMAS.  Then have at him, to begin withal.
          [THERIDAMAS shoots at the GOVERNOR.]

     GOVERNOR.  Yet save my life, and let this wound appease
     The mortal fury of great Tamburlaine!

     TAMBURLAINE.  No, though Asphaltis' lake were liquid gold,
     And offer'd me as ransom for thy life,
     Yet shouldst thou die.--Shoot at him all at once.
          [They shoot.]
     So, now he hangs like Bagdet's [278] governor,
     Having as many bullets in his flesh
     As there be breaches in her batter'd wall.
     Go now, and bind the burghers hand and foot,
     And cast them headlong in the city's lake.
     Tartars and Persians shall inhabit there;
     And, to command the city, I will build
     A citadel, [279] that all Africa,
     Which hath been subject to the Persian king,
     Shall pay me tribute for in Babylon.

     TECHELLES.
     What shall be done with their wives and children, my lord?

     TAMBURLAINE.  Techelles, drown them all, man, woman, and child;
     Leave not a Babylonian in the town.

     TECHELLES.  I will about it straight.--Come, soldiers.
          [Exit with SOLDIERS.]

     TAMBURLAINE.  Now, Casane, where's the Turkish Alcoran,
     And all the heaps of superstitious books
     Found in the temples of that Mahomet
     Whom I have thought a god? they shall be burnt.

     USUMCASANE.  Here they are, my lord.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Well said! [280] let there be a fire presently.
          [They light a fire.]
     In vain, I see, men worship Mahomet:
     My sword hath sent millions of Turks to hell,
     Slew all his priests, his kinsmen, and his friends,
     And yet I live untouch'd by Mahomet.
     There is a God, full of revenging wrath,
     ]From whom the thunder and the lightning breaks,
     Whose scourge I am, and him will I [281] obey.
     So, Casane; fling them in the fire.--
          [They burn the books.]
     Now, Mahomet, if thou have any power,
     Come down thyself and work a miracle:
     Thou art not worthy to be worshipped
     That suffer'st [282] flames of fire to burn the writ
     Wherein the sum of thy religion rests:
     Why send'st [283] thou not a furious whirlwind down,
     To blow thy Alcoran up to thy throne,
     Where men report thou sitt'st [284] by God himself?
     Or vengeance on the head [285] of Tamburlaine
     That shakes his sword against thy majesty,
     And spurns the abstracts of thy foolish laws?--
     Well, soldiers, Mahomet remains in hell;
     He cannot hear the voice of Tamburlaine:
     Seek out another godhead to adore;
     The God that sits in heaven, if any god,
     For he is God alone, and none but he.

          Re-enter TECHELLES.

     TECHELLES.  I have fulfill'd your highness' will, my lord:
     Thousands of men, drown'd in Asphaltis' lake,
     Have made the water swell above the banks,
     And fishes, fed [286] by human carcasses,
     Amaz'd, swim up and down upon [287] the waves,
     As when they swallow assafoetida,
     Which makes them fleet [288] aloft and gape [289] for air.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Well, then, my friendly lords, what now remains,
     But that we leave sufficient garrison,
     And presently depart to Persia,
     To triumph after all our victories?

     THERIDAMAS.  Ay, good my lord, let us in [290] haste to Persia;
     And let this captain be remov'd the walls
     To some high hill about the city here.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Let it be so;--about it, soldiers;--
     But stay; I feel myself distemper'd suddenly.

     TECHELLES.  What is it dares distemper Tamburlaine?

     TAMBURLAINE.  Something, Techelles; but I know not what.--
     But, forth, ye vassals! [291] whatsoe'er [292] it be,
     Sickness or death can never conquer me.
          [Exeunt.]




SCENE II.

          Enter CALLAPINE, KING OF AMASIA, a CAPTAIN, and train,
          with drums and trumpets.

     CALLAPINE.  King of Amasia, now our mighty host
     Marcheth in Asia Major, where the streams
     Of Euphrates [293] and Tigris swiftly run;
     And here may we [294] behold great Babylon,
     Circled about with Limnasphaltis' lake,
     Where Tamburlaine with all his army lies,
     Which being faint and weary with the siege,
     We may lie ready to encounter him
     Before his host be full from Babylon,
     And so revenge our latest grievous loss,
     If God or Mahomet send any aid.

     KING OF AMASIA.  Doubt not, my lord, but we shall conquer him:
     The monster that hath drunk a sea of blood,
     And yet gapes still for more to quench his thirst,
     Our Turkish swords shall headlong send to hell;
     And that vile carcass, drawn by warlike kings,
     The fowls shall eat; for never sepulchre
     Shall grace this [295] base-born tyrant Tamburlaine.

     CALLAPINE.  When I record [296] my parents' slavish life,
     Their cruel death, mine own captivity,
     My viceroys' bondage under Tamburlaine,
     Methinks I could sustain a thousand deaths,
     To be reveng'd of all his villany.--
     Ah, sacred Mahomet, thou that hast seen
     Millions of Turks perish by Tamburlaine,
     Kingdoms made waste, brave cities sack'd and burnt,
     And but one host is left to honour thee,
     Aid [297] thy obedient servant Callapine,
     And make him, after all these overthrows,
     To triumph over cursed Tamburlaine!

     KING OF AMASIA.  Fear not, my lord:  I see great Mahomet,
     Clothed in purple clouds, and on his head
     A chaplet brighter than Apollo's crown,
     Marching about the air with armed men,
     To join with you against this Tamburlaine.

     CAPTAIN.  Renowmed [298] general, mighty Callapine,
     Though God himself and holy Mahomet
     Should come in person to resist your power,
     Yet might your mighty host encounter all,
     And pull proud Tamburlaine upon his knees
     To sue for mercy at your highness' feet.

     CALLAPINE.  Captain, the force of Tamburlaine is great,
     His fortune greater, and the victories
     Wherewith he hath so sore dismay'd the world
     Are greatest to discourage all our drifts;
     Yet, when the pride of Cynthia is at full,
     She wanes again; and so shall his, I hope;
     For we have here the chief selected men
     Of twenty several kingdoms at the least;
     Nor ploughman, priest, nor merchant, stays at home;
     All Turkey is in arms with Callapine;
     And never will we sunder camps and arms
     Before himself or his be conquered:
     This is the time that must eternize me
     For conquering the tyrant of the world.
     Come, soldiers, let us lie in wait for him,
     And, if we find him absent from his camp,
     Or that it be rejoin'd again at full,
     Assail it, and be sure of victory.
          [Exeunt.]




SCENE III.

          Enter THERIDAMAS, TECHELLES, and USUMCASANE.

     THERIDAMAS.  Weep, heavens, and vanish into liquid tears!
     Fall, stars that govern his nativity,
     And summon all the shining lamps of heaven
     To cast their bootless fires to the earth,
     And shed their feeble influence in the air;
     Muffle your beauties with eternal clouds;
     For Hell and Darkness pitch their pitchy tents,
     And Death, with armies of Cimmerian spirits,
     Gives battle 'gainst the heart of Tamburlaine!
     Now, in defiance of that wonted love
     Your sacred virtues pour'd upon his throne,
     And made his state an honour to the heavens,
     These cowards invisibly [299] assail his soul,
     And threaten conquest on our sovereign;
     But, if he die, your glories are disgrac'd,
     Earth droops, and says that hell in heaven is plac'd!

     TECHELLES.  O, then, ye powers that sway eternal seats,
     And guide this massy substance of the earth,
     If you retain desert of holiness,
     As your supreme estates instruct our thoughts,
     Be not inconstant, careless of your fame,
     Bear not the burden of your enemies' joys,
     Triumphing in his fall whom you advanc'd;
     But, as his birth, life, health, and majesty
     Were strangely blest and governed by heaven,
     So honour, heaven, (till heaven dissolved be,)
     His birth, his life, his health, and majesty!

     USUMCASANE.  Blush, heaven, to lose the honour of thy name,
     To see thy footstool set upon thy head;
     And let no baseness in thy haughty breast
     Sustain a shame of such inexcellence, [300]
     To see the devils mount in angels' thrones,
     And angels dive into the pools of hell!
     And, though they think their painful date is out,
     And that their power is puissant as Jove's,
     Which makes them manage arms against thy state,
     Yet make them feel the strength of Tamburlaine
     (Thy instrument and note of majesty)
     Is greater far than they can thus subdue;
     For, if he die, thy glory is disgrac'd,
     Earth droops, and says that hell in heaven is plac'd!

          Enter TAMBURLAINE, [301] drawn in his chariot (as before)
          by ORCANES king of Natolia, and the KING OF JERUSALEM,
          AMYRAS, CELEBINUS, and Physicians.

     TAMBURLAINE.  What daring god torments my body thus,
     And seeks to conquer mighty Tamburlaine?
     Shall sickness prove me now to be a man,
     That have been term'd the terror of the world?
     Techelles and the rest, come, take your swords,
     And threaten him whose hand afflicts my soul:
     Come, let us march against the powers of heaven,
     And set black streamers in the firmament,
     To signify the slaughter of the gods.
     Ah, friends, what shall I do? I cannot stand.
     Come, carry me to war against the gods,
     That thus envy the health of Tamburlaine.

     THERIDAMAS.  Ah, good my lord, leave these impatient words,
     Which add much danger to your malady!

     TAMBURLAINE.  Why, shall I sit and languish in this pain?
     No, strike the drums, and, in revenge of this,
     Come, let us charge our spears, and pierce his breast
     Whose shoulders bear the axis of the world,
     That, if I perish, heaven and earth may fade.
     Theridamas, haste to the court of Jove;
     Will him to send Apollo hither straight,
     To cure me, or I'll fetch him down myself.

     TECHELLES.
     Sit still, my gracious lord; this grief will cease, [302]
     And cannot last, it is so violent.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Not last, Techelles! no, for I shall die.
     See, where my slave, the ugly monster Death,
     Shaking and quivering, pale and wan for fear,
     Stands aiming at me with his murdering dart,
     Who flies away at every glance I give,
     And, when I look away, comes stealing on!--
     Villain, away, and hie thee to the field!
     I and mine army come to load thy back
     With souls of thousand mangled carcasses.--
     Look, where he goes! but, see, he comes again,
     Because I stay!  Techelles, let us march,
     And weary Death with bearing souls to hell.

     FIRST PHYSICIAN.  Pleaseth your majesty to drink this potion,
     Which will abate the fury of your fit,
     And cause some milder spirits govern you.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Tell me what think you of my sickness now?

     FIRST PHYSICIAN.  I view'd your urine, and the hypostasis, [303]
     Thick and obscure, doth make your danger great:
     Your veins are full of accidental heat,
     Whereby the moisture of your blood is dried:
     The humidum and calor, which some hold
     Is not a parcel of the elements,
     But of a substance more divine and pure,
     Is almost clean extinguished and spent;
     Which, being the cause of life, imports your death:
     Besides, my lord, this day is critical,
     Dangerous to those whose crisis is as yours:
     Your artiers, [304] which alongst the veins convey
     The lively spirits which the heart engenders,
     Are parch'd and void of spirit, that the soul,
     Wanting those organons by which it moves,
     Cannot endure, by argument of art.
     Yet, if your majesty may escape this day,
     No doubt but you shall soon recover all.

     TAMBURLAINE.  Then will I comfort all my vital parts,
     And live, in spite of death, above a day.
          [Alarms within.]

          Enter a Messenger.

     MESSENGER.  My lord, young Callapine, that lately fled
     from your majesty, hath now gathered a fresh army, and,
     hearing your absence in the field, offers to set upon [305] us
     presently.

     TAMBURLAINE.  See, my physicians, now, how Jove hath sent
     A present medicine to recure my pain!
     My looks shall make them fly; and, might I follow,
     There should not one of all the villain's power
     Live to give offer of another fight.

     USUMCASANE.  I joy, my lord, your highness is so strong,
     That can endure so well your royal presence,
     Which only will dismay the enemy.

     TAMBURLAINE.  I know it will, Casane.--Draw, you slaves!
     In spite of death, I will go shew my face.
          [Alarms.  Exit TAMBURLAINE with all the rest (except the
          PHYSICIANS), and re-enter presently.]

     TAMBURLAINE.  Thus are the villain cowards [306] fled for fear,
     Like summer's vapours vanish'd by the sun;
     And, could I but a while pursue the field,
     That Callapine should be my slave again.
     But I perceive my martial strength is spent:
     In vain I strive and rail against those powers
     That mean t' invest me in a higher throne,
     As much too high for this disdainful earth.
     Give me a map; then let me see how much
     Is left for me to conquer all the world,
     That these, my boys, may finish all my wants.
          [One brings a map.]
     Here I began to march towards Persia,
     Along Armenia and the Caspian Sea,
     And thence unto [307] Bithynia, where I took
     The Turk and his great empress prisoners.
     Then march'd I into Egypt and Arabia;
     And here, not far from Alexandria,
     Whereas [308] the Terrene [309] and the Red Sea meet,
     Being distant less than full a hundred leagues,
     I meant to cut a channel to them both,
     That men might quickly sail to India.
     ]From thence to Nubia near Borno-lake,
     And so along the Aethiopian sea,
     Cutting the tropic line of Capricorn,
     I conquer'd all as far as Zanzibar.
     Then, by the northern part of Africa,
     I came at last to Graecia, and from thence
     To Asia, where I stay against my will;
     Which is from Scythia, where I first began, [310]
     Backward[s] and forwards near five thousand leagues.
     Look here, my boys; see, what a world of ground
     Lies westward from the midst of Cancer's line
     Unto the rising of this [311] earthly globe,
     Whereas the sun, declining from our sight,
     Begins the day with our Antipodes!
     And shall I die, and this unconquered?
     Lo, here, my sons, are all the golden mines,
     Inestimable drugs and precious stones,
     More worth than Asia and the world beside;
     And from th' Antarctic Pole eastward behold
     As much more land, which never was descried,
     Wherein are rocks of pearl that shine as bright
     As all the lamps that beautify the sky!
     And shall I die, and this unconquered?
     Here, lovely boys; what death forbids my life,
     That let your lives command in spite of death.

     AMYRAS.  Alas, my lord, how should our bleeding hearts,
     Wounded and broken with your highness' grief,
     Retain a thought of joy or spark of life?
     Your soul gives essence to our wretched subjects, [312]
     Whose matter is incorporate in your flesh.

     CELEBINUS.  Your pains do pierce our souls; no hope survives,
     For by your life we entertain our lives.

     TAMBURLAINE.  But, sons, this subject, not of force enough
     To hold the fiery spirit it contains,
     Must part, imparting his impressions
     By equal portions into [313] both your breasts;
     My flesh, divided in your precious shapes,
     Shall still retain my spirit, though I die,
     And live in all your seeds [314] immortally.--
     Then now remove me, that I may resign
     My place and proper title to my son.--
     First, take my scourge and my imperial crown,
     And mount my royal chariot of estate,
     That I may see thee crown'd before I die.--
     Help me, my lords, to make my last remove.
          [They assist TAMBURLAINE to descend from the chariot.]

     THERIDAMAS.  A woful change, my lord, that daunts our thoughts
     More than the ruin of our proper souls!

     TAMBURLAINE.  Sit up, my son, [and] let me see how well
     Thou wilt become thy father's majesty.

     AMYRAS.  With what a flinty bosom should I joy
     The breath of life and burden of my soul,
     If not resolv'd into resolved pains,
     My body's mortified lineaments [315]
     Should exercise the motions of my heart,
     Pierc'd with the joy of any dignity!
     O father, if the unrelenting ears
     Of Death and Hell be shut against my prayers,
     And that the spiteful influence of Heaven
     Deny my soul fruition of her joy,
     How should I step, or stir my hateful feet
     Against the inward powers of my heart,
     Leading a life that only strives to die,
     And plead in vain unpleasing sovereignty!

     TAMBURLAINE.  Let not thy love exceed thine honour, son,
     Nor bar thy mind that magnanimity
     That nobly must admit necessity.
     Sit up, my boy, and with these [316] silken reins
     Bridle the steeled stomachs of these [317] jades.

     THERIDAMAS.  My lord, you must obey his majesty,
     Since fate commands and proud necessity.

     AMYRAS.  Heavens witness me with what a broken heart
          [Mounting the chariot.]
     And damned [318] spirit I ascend this seat,
     And send my soul, before my father die,
     His anguish and his burning agony!
          [They crown AMYRAS.]

     TAMBURLAINE.  Now fetch the hearse of fair Zenocrate;
     Let it be plac'd by this my fatal chair,
     And serve as parcel of my funeral.

     USUMCASANE.  Then feels your majesty no sovereign ease,
     Nor may our hearts, all drown'd in tears of blood,
     Joy any hope of your recovery?

     TAMBURLAINE.  Casane, no; the monarch of the earth,
     And eyeless monster that torments my soul,
     Cannot behold the tears ye shed for me,
     And therefore still augments his cruelty.

     TECHELLES.  Then let some god oppose his holy power
     Against the wrath and tyranny of Death,
     That his tear-thirsty and unquenched hate
     May be upon himself reverberate!
          [They bring in the hearse of ZENOCRATE.]

     TAMBURLAINE.  Now, eyes, enjoy your latest benefit,
     And, when my soul hath virtue of your sight,
     Pierce through the coffin and the sheet of gold,
     And glut your longings with a heaven of joy.
     So, reign, my son; scourge and control those slaves,
     Guiding thy chariot with thy father's hand.
     As precious is the charge thou undertak'st
     As that which Clymene's [319] brain-sick son did guide,
     When wandering Phoebe's [320] ivory cheeks were scorch'd,
     And all the earth, like Aetna, breathing fire:
     Be warn'd by him, then; learn with awful eye
     To sway a throne as dangerous as his;
     For, if thy body thrive not full of thoughts
     As pure and fiery as Phyteus' [321] beams,
     The nature of these proud rebelling jades
     Will take occasion by the slenderest hair,
     And draw thee [322] piecemeal, like Hippolytus,
     Through rocks more steep and sharp than Caspian cliffs: [323]
     The nature of thy chariot will not bear
     A guide of baser temper than myself,
     More than heaven's coach the pride of Phaeton.
     Farewell, my boys! my dearest friends, farewell!
     My body feels, my soul doth weep to see
     Your sweet desires depriv'd my company,
     For Tamburlaine, the scourge of God, must die.
          [Dies.]

     AMYRAS.  Meet heaven and earth, and here let all things end,
     For earth hath spent the pride of all her fruit,
     And heaven consum'd his choicest living fire!
     Let earth and heaven his timeless death deplore,
     For both their worths will equal him no more!
          [Exeunt.]




                            The Sacred Wood


Intravit pinacothecam senex canus, exercitati vultus et qui videretur
nescio quid magnum promittere, sed cultu non proinde speciosus, et
facile appareret eum ex hac nota litteratum esse, quos odisse divites
solent ... 'ego inquit 'poeta sum et ut spero, non humillimi spiritus,
si modo coronis aliquid credendum est, quas etiam ad immeritos deferre
gratia solet.PETRONIUS.

I also like to dine on becaficas.




                            The Sacred Wood

                     Essays On Poetry And Criticism

                                   By

                              T. S. Eliot

                           Methuen & Co. Ltd.
                          36 Essex Street W.C.
                                 London
                                  1920




For

H. W. E.

Tacuit Et Fecit




Certain of these essays appeared, in the same or a more primitive form,
in _The Times Literary Supplement_, _The Athenum_, _Art and Letters_,
and _The Egoist_. The author desires to express his obligation to the
editors of these periodicals.




                              INTRODUCTION


To anyone who is at all capable of experiencing the pleasures of
justice, it is gratifying to be able to make amends to a writer whom one
has vaguely depreciated for some years. The faults and foibles of
Matthew Arnold are no less evident to me now than twelve years ago,
after my first admiration for him; but I hope that now, on re-reading
some of his prose with more care, I can better appreciate his position.
And what makes Arnold seem all the more remarkable is, that if he were
our exact contemporary, he would find all his labour to perform again. A
moderate number of persons have engaged in what is called critical
writing, but no conclusion is any more solidly established than it was
in 1865. In the first essay in the first _Essays in Criticism_ we read
that

    it has long seemed to me that the burst of creative activity in our
    literature, through the first quarter of this century, had about it
    in fact something premature; and that from this cause its
    productions are doomed, most of them, in spite of the sanguine hopes
    which accompanied and do still accompany them, to prove hardly more
    lasting than the productions of far less splendid epochs. And this
    prematureness comes from its having proceeded without having its
    proper data, without sufficient material to work with. In other
    words, the English poetry of the first quarter of this century, with
    plenty of energy, plenty of creative force, did not know enough.
    This makes Byron so empty of matter, Shelley so incoherent,
    Wordsworth even, profound as he is, yet so wanting in completeness
    and variety.

This judgment of the Romantic Generation has not, so far as I know, ever
been successfully controverted; and it has not, so far as I know, ever
made very much impression on popular opinion. Once a poet is accepted,
his reputation is seldom disturbed, for better or worse. So little
impression has Arnolds opinion made, that his statement will probably
be as true of the first quarter of the twentieth century as it was of
the nineteenth. A few sentences later, Arnold articulates the nature of
the malady:

    In the Greece of Pindar and Sophocles, in the England of
    Shakespeare, the poet lived in a current of ideas in the highest
    degree animating and nourishing to the creative power; society was,
    in the fullest measure, permeated by fresh thought, intelligent and
    alive; and this state of things is the true basis for the creative
    powers exercise, in this it finds its data, its materials, truly
    ready for its hand; all the books and reading in the world are only
    valuable as they are helps to this.

At this point Arnold is indicating the centre of interest and activity
of the critical intelligence; and it is at this perception, we may
almost say, that Arnolds critical activity stopped. In a society in
which the arts were seriously studied, in which the art of writing was
respected, Arnold might have become a critic. How astonishing it would
be, if a man like Arnold had concerned himself with the art of the
novel, had compared Thackeray with Flaubert, had analysed the work of
Dickens, had shown his contemporaries exactly why the author of _Amos
Barton_ is a more _serious_ writer than Dickens, and why the author of
_La Chartreuse de Parma_ is more serious than either? In _Culture and
Anarchy_, in _Literature and Dogma_, Arnold was not occupied so much in
establishing a criticism as in attacking the uncritical. The difference
is that while in constructive work something can be done, destructive
work must incessantly be repeated; and furthermore Arnold, in his
destruction, went for game outside of the literary preserve altogether,
much of it political game untouched and inviolable by ideas. This
activity of Arnolds we must regret; it might perhaps have been carried
on as effectively, if not quite so neatly, by some disciple (had there
been one) in an editorial position on a newspaper. Arnold is not to be
blamed: he wasted his strength, as men of superior ability sometimes do,
because he saw something to be done and no one else to do it. The
temptation, to any man who is interested in ideas and primarily in
literature, to put literature into the corner until he has cleaned up
the whole country first, is almost irresistible. Some persons, like Mr.
Wells and Mr. Chesterton, have succeeded so well in this latter
profession of setting the house in order, and have attracted so much
more attention than Arnold, that we must conclude that it is indeed
their proper rle, and that they have done well for themselves in laying
literature aside.

Not only is the critic tempted outside of criticism. The criticism
proper betrays such poverty of ideas and such atrophy of sensibility
that men who ought to preserve their critical ability for the
improvement of their own creative work are tempted into criticism. I do
not intend from this the usually silly inference that the Creative
gift is higher than the critical. When one creative mind is better
than another, the reason often is that the better is the more critical.
But the great bulk of the work of criticism could be done by minds of
the second order, and it is just these minds of the second order that
are difficult to find. They are necessary for the rapid circulation of
ideas. The periodical pressthe ideal literary periodicalis an
instrument of transport; and the literary periodical press is dependent
upon the existence of a sufficient number of second-order (I do not say
second-rate, the word is too derogatory) minds to supply its material.
These minds are necessary for that current of ideas, that society
permeated by fresh thought, of which Arnold speaks.

It is a perpetual heresy of English culture to believe that only the
first-order mind, the Genius, the Great Man, matters; that he is
solitary, and produced best in the least favourable environment, perhaps
the Public School; and that it is most likely a sign of inferiority that
Paris can show so many minds of the second order. If too much bad verse
is published in London, it does not occur to us to raise our standards,
to do anything to educate the poetasters; the remedy is, Kill them off.
I quote from Mr. Edmund Gosse:[1]

Footnote 1:

  _Sunday Times_, May 30, 1920.

    Unless something is done to stem this flood of poetastry the art of
    verse will become not merely superfluous, but ridiculous. Poetry is
    not a formula which a thousand flappers and hobbledehoys ought to be
    able to master in a week without any training, and the mere fact
    that it seems to be now practised with such universal ease is enough
    to prove that something has gone amiss with our standards.... This
    is all wrong, and will lead us down into the abyss like so many
    Gadarene swine unless we resist it.

We quite agree that poetry is not a formula. But what does Mr. Gosse
propose to do about it? If Mr. Gosse had found himself in the flood of
poetastry in the reign of Elizabeth, what would he have done about it?
would he have stemmed it? What exactly is this abyss? and if something
has gone amiss with our standards, is it wholly the fault of the
younger generation that it is aware of no authority that it must
respect? It is part of the business of the critic to preserve
traditionwhere a good tradition exists. It is part of his business to
see literature steadily and to see it whole; and this is eminently to
see it _not_ as consecrated by time, but to see it beyond time; to see
the best work of our time and the best work of twenty-five hundred years
ago with the same eyes.[2] It is part of his business to help the
poetaster to understand his own limitations. The poetaster who
understands his own limitations will be one of our useful second-order
minds; a good minor poet (something which is very rare) or another good
critic. As for the first-order minds, when they happen, they will be
none the worse off for a current of ideas; the solitude with which
they will always and everywhere be invested is a very different thing
from isolation, or a monarchy of death.

Footnote 2:

  Arnold, it must be admitted, gives us often the impression of seeing
  the masters, whom he quotes, as canonical literature, rather than as
  masters.

    NOTE.I may commend as a model to critics who desire to correct some
    of the poetical vagaries of the present age, the following passage
    from a writer who cannot be accused of flaccid leniency, and the
    justice of whose criticism must be acknowledged even by those who
    feel a strong partiality toward the school of poets criticized:

    Yet great labour, directed by great abilities, is never wholly
    lost; if they frequently threw away their wit upon false conceits,
    they likewise sometimes struck out unexpected truth: if their
    conceits were far-fetched, they were often worth the carriage. To
    write on their plan, it was at least necessary to read and think. No
    man could be born a metaphysical poet, nor assume the dignity of a
    writer, by descriptions copied from descriptions, by imitations
    borrowed from imitations, by traditional imagery, and hereditary
    similes, by readiness of rhyme, and volubility of syllables.

    In perusing the works of this race of authors, the mind is
    exercised either by recollection or inquiry: something already
    learned is to be retrieved, or something new is to be examined. If
    their greatness seldom elevates, their acuteness often surprises; if
    the imagination is not always gratified, at least the powers of
    reflection and comparison are employed; and in the mass of materials
    which ingenious absurdity has thrown together, genuine wit and
    useful knowledge may be sometimes found buried perhaps in grossness
    of expression, but useful to those who know their value; and such
    as, when they are expanded to perspicuity, and polished to elegance,
    may give lustre to works which have more propriety though less
    copiousness of sentiment.JOHNSON, _Life of Cowley_.




                                Contents

          Introduction                                     ix

          The Perfect Critic                                1

          Imperfect Critics

          Swinburne as Critic                              15

          A Romantic Aristocrat                            22

          The Local Flavour                                29

          A Note on the American Critic                    34

          The French Intelligence                          39

          Tradition and the Individual Talent              42

          The Possibility of a Poetic Drama                54

          Euripides and Professor Murray                   64

          Rhetoric and Poetic Drama                        71

          Notes on the Blank Verse of Christopher
          Marlowe                                          78

          Hamlet and His Problems                          87

          Ben Jonson                                       95

          Phillip Massinger                               112

          Swinburne as Poet                               131

          Blake                                           137

          Dante                                           144




                           The Perfect Critic


                                   I

    Eriger en lois ses impressions personnelles, cest le grand effort
    dun homme sil est sincre._Lettres  lAmazone._

Coleridge was perhaps the greatest of English critics, and in a sense
the last. After Coleridge we have Matthew Arnold; but ArnoldI think it
will be concededwas rather a propagandist for criticism than a critic,
a popularizer rather than a creator of ideas. So long as this island
remains an island (and we are no nearer the Continent than were Arnolds
contemporaries) the work of Arnold will be important; it is still a
bridge across the Channel, and it will always have been good sense.
Since Arnolds attempt to correct his countrymen, English criticism has
followed two directions. When a distinguished critic observed recently,
in a newspaper article, that poetry is the most highly organized form
of intellectual activity, we were conscious that we were reading
neither Coleridge nor Arnold. Not only have the words organized and
activity, occurring together in this phrase, that familiar vague
suggestion of the scientific vocabulary which is characteristic of
modern writing, but one asked questions which Coleridge and Arnold would
not have permitted one to ask. How is it, for instance, that poetry is
more highly organized than astronomy, physics, or pure mathematics,
which we imagine to be, in relation to the scientist who practises them,
intellectual activity of a pretty highly organized type? Mere strings
of words, our critic continues with felicity and truth, flung like
dabs of paint across a blank canvas, may awaken surprise ... but have no
significance whatever in the history of literature. The phrases by
which Arnold is best known may be inadequate, they may assemble more
doubts than they dispel, but they usually have some meaning. And if a
phrase like the most highly organized form of intellectual activity is
the highest organization of thought of which contemporary criticism, in
a distinguished representative, is capable, then, we conclude, modern
criticism is degenerate.

The verbal disease above noticed may be reserved for diagnosis by and
by. It is not a disease from which Mr. Arthur Symons (for the quotation
was, of course, not from Mr. Symons) notably suffers. Mr. Symons
represents the other tendency; he is a representative of what is always
called sthetic criticism or impressionistic criticism. And it is
this form of criticism which I propose to examine at once. Mr. Symons,
the critical successor of Pater, and partly of Swinburne (I fancy that
the phrase sick or sorry is the common property of all three), _is_
the impressionistic critic. He, if anyone, would be said to expose a
sensitive and cultivated mindcultivated, that is, by the accumulation
of a considerable variety of impressions from all the arts and several
languagesbefore an object; and his criticism, if anyones, would be
said to exhibit to us, like the plate, the faithful record of the
impressions, more numerous or more refined than our own, upon a mind
more sensitive than our own. A record, we observe, which is also an
interpretation, a translation; for it must itself impose impressions
upon us, and these impressions are as much created as transmitted by the
criticism. I do not say at once that this is Mr. Symons; but it is the
impressionistic critic, and the impressionistic critic is supposed to
be Mr. Symons.

At hand is a volume which we may test.[3] Ten of these thirteen essays
deal with single plays of Shakespeare, and it is therefore fair to take
one of these ten as a specimen of the book:

Footnote 3:

  _Studies in Elizabethan Drama._ By Arthur Symons.

    _Antony and Cleopatra_ is the most wonderful, I think, of all
    Shakespeares plays....

and Mr. Symons reflects that Cleopatra is the most wonderful of all
women:

    The queen who ends the dynasty of the Ptolemies has been the star of
    poets, a malign star shedding baleful light, from Horace and
    Propertius down to Victor Hugo; and it is not to poets only....

What, we ask, is this for? as a page on Cleopatra, and on her possible
origin in the dark lady of the Sonnets, unfolds itself. And we find,
gradually, that this is not an essay on a work of art or a work of
intellect; but that Mr. Symons is living through the play as one might
live it through in the theatre; recounting, commenting:

    In her last days Cleopatra touches a certain elevation ... she would
    die a thousand times, rather than live to be a mockery and a scorn
    in mens mouths ... she is a woman to the last ... so she dies ...
    the play ends with a touch of grave pity ...

Presented in this rather unfair way, torn apart like the leaves of an
artichoke, the impressions of Mr. Symons come to resemble a common type
of popular literary lecture, in which the stories of plays or novels are
retold, the motives of the characters set forth, and the work of art
therefore made easier for the beginner. But this is not Mr. Symons
reason for writing. The reason why we find a similarity between his
essay and this form of education is that _Antony and Cleopatra_ is a
play with which we are pretty well acquainted, and of which we have,
therefore, our own impressions. We can please ourselves with our own
impressions of the characters and their emotions; and we do not find the
impressions of another person, however sensitive, very significant. But
if we can recall the time when we were ignorant of the French
symbolists, and met with _The Symbolist Movement in Literature_, we
remember that book as an introduction to wholly new feelings, as a
revelation. After we have read Verlaine and Laforgue and Rimbaud and
return to Mr. Symons book, we may find that our own impressions dissent
from his. The book has not, perhaps, a permanent value for the one
reader, but it has led to results of permanent importance for him.

The question is not whether Mr. Symons impressions are true or
false. So far as you can isolate the impression, the pure feeling,
it is, of course, neither true nor false. The point is that you never
rest at the pure feeling; you react in one of two ways, or, as I believe
Mr. Symons does, in a mixture of the two ways. The moment you try to put
the impressions into words, you either begin to analyse and construct,
to riger en lois, or you begin to create something else. It is
significant that Swinburne, by whose poetry Mr. Symons may at one time
have been influenced, is one man in his poetry and a different man in
his criticism; to this extent and in this respect only, that he is
satisfying a different impulse; he is criticizing, expounding,
arranging. You may say this is not the criticism of a critic, that it is
emotional, not intellectualthough of this there are two opinions, but
it is in the direction of analysis and construction, a beginning to
riger en lois, and not in the direction of creation. So I infer that
Swinburne found an adequate outlet for the creative impulse in his
poetry; and none of it was forced back and out through his critical
prose. The style of the latter is essentially a prose style; and Mr.
Symons prose is much more like Swinburnes poetry than it is like his
prose. I imaginethough here ones thought is moving in almost complete
darknessthat Mr. Symons is far more disturbed, far more profoundly
affected, by his reading than was Swinburne, who responded rather by a
violent and immediate and comprehensive burst of admiration which may
have left him internally unchanged. The disturbance in Mr. Symons is
almost, but not quite, to the point of creating; the reading sometimes
fecundates his emotions to produce something new which is not criticism,
but is not the expulsion, the ejection, the birth of creativeness.

The type is not uncommon, although Mr. Symons is far superior to most of
the type. Some writers are essentially of the type that reacts in excess
of the stimulus, making something new out of the impressions, but suffer
from a defect of vitality or an obscure obstruction which prevents
nature from taking its course. Their sensibility alters the object, but
never transforms it. Their reaction is that of the ordinary emotional
person developed to an exceptional degree. For this ordinary emotional
person, experiencing a work of art, has a mixed critical and creative
reaction. It is made up of comment and opinion, and also new emotions
which are vaguely applied to his own life. The sentimental person, in
whom a work of art arouses all sorts of emotions which have nothing to
do with that work of art whatever, but are accidents of personal
association, is an incomplete artist. For in an artist these suggestions
made by a work of art, which are purely personal, become fused with a
multitude of other suggestions from multitudinous experience, and result
in the production of a new object which is no longer purely personal,
because it is a work of art itself.

It would be rash to speculate, and is perhaps impossible to determine,
what is unfulfilled in Mr. Symons charming verse that overflows into
his critical prose. Certainly we may say that in Swinburnes verse the
circuit of impression and expression is complete; and Swinburne was
therefore able, in his criticism, to be more a critic than Mr. Symons.
This gives us an intimation why the artist iseach within his own
limitationsoftenest to be depended upon as a critic; his criticism will
be criticism, and not the satisfaction of a suppressed creative
wishwhich, in most other persons, is apt to interfere fatally.

Before considering what the proper critical reaction of artistic
sensibility is, how far criticism is feeling and how far thought,
and what sort of thought is permitted, it may be instructive to prod a
little into that other temperament, so different from Mr. Symons, which
issues in generalities such as that quoted near the beginning of this
article.


                                   II

    Lcrivain de style abstrait est presque toujours un sentimental,
    du moins un sensitif. Lcrivain artiste nest presque jamais un
    sentimental, et trs rarement un sensitif_Le Problme du Style._

The statement already quoted, that poetry is the most highly organized
form of intellectual activity, may be taken as a specimen of the
abstract style in criticism. The confused distinction which exists in
most heads between abstract and concrete is due not so much to a
manifest fact of the existence of two types of mind, an abstract and a
concrete, as to the existence of another type of mind, the verbal, or
philosophic. I, of course, do not imply any general condemnation of
philosophy; I am, for the moment, using the word philosophic to cover
the unscientific ingredients of philosophy; to cover, in fact, the
greater part of the philosophic output of the last hundred years. There
are two ways in which a word may be abstract. It may have (the word
activity, for example) a meaning which cannot be grasped by appeal to
any of the senses; its apprehension may require a deliberate suppression
of analogies of visual or muscular experience, which is none the less an
effort of imagination. Activity will mean for the trained scientist,
if he employ the term, either nothing at all or something still more
exact than anything it suggests to us. If we are allowed to accept
certain remarks of Pascal and Mr. Bertrand Russell about mathematics, we
believe that the mathematician deals with objectsif he will permit us
to call them objectswhich directly affect his sensibility. And during a
good part of history the philosopher endeavoured to deal with objects
which he believed to be of the same exactness as the mathematicians.
Finally Hegel arrived, and if not perhaps the first, he was certainly
the most prodigious exponent of emotional systematization, dealing with
his emotions as if they were definite objects which had aroused those
emotions. His followers have as a rule taken for granted that words have
definite meanings, overlooking the tendency of words to become
indefinite emotions. (No one who had not witnessed the event could
imagine the conviction in the tone of Professor Eucken as he pounded the
table and exclaimed _Was ist Geist? Geist ist ..._) If verbalism were
confined to professional philosophers, no harm would be done. But their
corruption has extended very far. Compare a medival theologian or
mystic, compare a seventeenth-century preacher, with any liberal
sermon since Schleiermacher, and you will observe that words have
changed their meanings. What they have lost is definite, and what they
have gained is indefinite.

The vast accumulations of knowledgeor at least of informationdeposited
by the nineteenth century have been responsible for an equally vast
ignorance. When there is so much to be known, when there are so many
fields of knowledge in which the same words are used with different
meanings, when every one knows a little about a great many things, it
becomes increasingly difficult for anyone to know whether he knows what
he is talking about or not. And when we do not know, or when we do not
know enough, we tend always to substitute emotions for thoughts. The
sentence so frequently quoted in this essay will serve for an example of
this process as well as any, and may be profitably contrasted with the
opening phrases of the _Posterior Analytics_. Not only all knowledge,
but all feeling, is in perception. The inventor of poetry as the most
highly organized form of intellectual activity was not engaged in
perceiving when he composed this definition; he had nothing to be aware
of except his own emotion about poetry. He was, in fact, absorbed in a
very different activity not only from that of Mr. Symons, but from
that of Aristotle.

Aristotle is a person who has suffered from the adherence of persons who
must be regarded less as his disciples than as his sectaries. One must
be firmly distrustful of accepting Aristotle in a canonical spirit; this
is to lose the whole living force of him. He was primarily a man of not
only remarkable but universal intelligence; and universal intelligence
means that he could apply his intelligence to anything. The ordinary
intelligence is good only for certain classes of objects; a brilliant
man of science, if he is interested in poetry at all, may conceive
grotesque judgments: like one poet because he reminds him of himself, or
another because he expresses emotions which he admires; he may use art,
in fact, as the outlet for the egotism which is suppressed in his own
speciality. But Aristotle had none of these impure desires to satisfy;
in whatever sphere of interest, he looked solely and steadfastly at the
object; in his short and broken treatise he provides an eternal
examplenot of laws, or even of method, for there is no method except to
be very intelligent, but of intelligence itself swiftly operating the
analysis of sensation to the point of principle and definition.

It is far less Aristotle than Horace who has been the model for
criticism up to the nineteenth century. A precept, such as Horace or
Boileau gives us, is merely an unfinished analysis. It appears as a law,
a rule, because it does not appear in its most general form; it is
empirical. When we understand necessity, as Spinoza knew, we are free
because we assent. The dogmatic critic, who lays down a rule, who
affirms a value, has left his labour incomplete. Such statements may
often be justifiable as a saving of time; but in matters of great
importance the critic must not coerce, and he must not make judgments of
worse and better. He must simply elucidate: the reader will form the
correct judgment for himself.

And again, the purely technical criticthe critic, that is, who writes
to expound some novelty or impart some lesson to practitioners of an
artcan be called a critic only in a narrow sense. He may be analysing
perceptions and the means for arousing perceptions, but his aim is
limited and is not the disinterested exercise of intelligence. The
narrowness of the aim makes easier the detection of the merit or
feebleness of the work; even of these writers there are very fewso that
their criticism is of great importance within its limits. So much
suffices for Campion. Dryden is far more disinterested; he displays much
free intelligence; and yet even Drydenor any _literary_ critic of the
seventeenth centuryis not quite a free mind, compared, for instance,
with such a mind as Rochefoucaulds. There is always a tendency to
legislate rather than to inquire, to revise accepted laws, even to
overturn, but to reconstruct out of the same material. And the free
intelligence is that which is wholly devoted to inquiry.

Coleridge, again, whose natural abilities, and some of whose
performances, are probably more remarkable than those of any other
modern critic, cannot be estimated as an intelligence completely free.
The nature of the restraint in his case is quite different from that
which limited the seventeenth-century critics, and is much more
personal. Coleridges metaphysical interest was quite genuine, and was,
like most metaphysical interest, an affair of his emotions. But a
literary critic should have no emotions except those immediately
provoked by a work of artand these (as I have already hinted) are, when
valid, perhaps not to be called emotions at all. Coleridge is apt to
take leave of the data of criticism, and arouse the suspicion that he
has been diverted into a metaphysical hare-and-hounds. His end does not
always appear to be the return to the work of art with improved
perception and intensified, because more conscious, enjoyment; his
centre of interest changes, his feelings are impure. In the derogatory
sense he is more philosophic than Aristotle. For everything that
Aristotle says illuminates the literature which is the occasion for
saying it; but Coleridge only now and then. It is one more instance of
the pernicious effect of emotion.

Aristotle had what is called the scientific minda mind which, as it is
rarely found among scientists except in fragments, might better be
called the intelligent mind. For there is no other intelligence than
this, and so far as artists and men of letters are intelligent (we may
doubt whether the level of intelligence among men of letters is as high
as among men of science) their intelligence is of this kind.
Sainte-Beuve was a physiologist by training; but it is probable that his
mind, like that of the ordinary scientific specialist, was limited in
its interest, and that this was not, primarily, an interest in art. If
he was a critic, there is no doubt that he was a very good one; but we
may conclude that he earned some other name. Of all modern critics,
perhaps Remy de Gourmont had most of the general intelligence of
Aristotle. An amateur, though an excessively able amateur, in
physiology, he combined to a remarkable degree sensitiveness, erudition,
sense of fact and sense of history, and generalizing power.

We assume the gift of a superior sensibility. And for sensibility wide
and profound reading does not mean merely a more extended pasture. There
is not merely an increase of understanding, leaving the original acute
impression unchanged. The new impressions modify the impressions
received from the objects already known. An impression needs to be
constantly refreshed by new impressions in order that it may persist at
all; it needs to take its place in a system of impressions. And this
system tends to become articulate in a generalized statement of literary
beauty.

There are, for instance, many scattered lines and tercets in the _Divine
Comedy_ which are capable of transporting even a quite uninitiated
reader, just sufficiently acquainted with the roots of the language to
decipher the meaning, to an impression of overpowering beauty. This
impression may be so deep that no subsequent study and understanding
will intensify it. But at this point the impression is emotional; the
reader in the ignorance which we postulate is unable to distinguish the
poetry from an emotional state aroused in himself by the poetry, a state
which may be merely an indulgence of his own emotions. The poetry may be
an accidental stimulus. The end of the enjoyment of poetry is a pure
contemplation from which all the accidents of personal emotion are
removed; thus we aim to see the object as it really is and find a
meaning for the words of Arnold. And without a labour which is largely a
labour of the intelligence, we are unable to attain that stage of vision
_amor intellectualis Dei_.

Such considerations, cast in this general form, may appear commonplaces.
But I believe that it is always opportune to call attention to the
torpid superstition that appreciation is one thing, and intellectual
criticism something else. Appreciation in popular psychology is one
faculty, and criticism another, an arid cleverness building theoretical
scaffolds upon ones own perceptions or those of others. On the
contrary, the true generalization is not something superposed upon an
accumulation of perceptions; the perceptions do not, in a really
appreciative mind, accumulate as a mass, but form themselves as a
structure; and criticism is the statement in language of this structure;
it is a development of sensibility. The bad criticism, on the other
hand, is that which is nothing but an expression of emotion. And
emotional peoplesuch as stockbrokers, politicians, men of scienceand a
few people who pride themselves on being unemotionaldetest or applaud
great writers such as Spinoza or Stendhal because of their frigidity.

The writer of the present essay once committed himself to the statement
that The poetic critic is criticizing poetry in order to create
poetry. He is now inclined to believe that the historical and the
philosophical critics had better be called historians and philosophers
quite simply. As for the rest, there are merely various degrees of
intelligence. It is fatuous to say that criticism is for the sake of
creation or creation for the sake of criticism. It is also fatuous to
assume that there are ages of criticism and ages of creativeness, as if
by plunging ourselves into intellectual darkness we were in better hope
of finding spiritual light. The two directions of sensibility are
complementary; and as sensibility is rare, unpopular, and desirable, it
is to be expected that the critic and the creative artist should
frequently be the same person.




                           Imperfect Critics


                          Swinburne as Critic


Three conclusions at least issue from the perusal of Swinburnes
critical essays: Swinburne had mastered his material, was more inward
with the Tudor-Stuart dramatists than any man of pure letters before or
since; he is a more reliable guide to them than Hazlitt, Coleridge, or
Lamb; and his perception of relative values is almost always correct.
Against these merits we may oppose two objections: the style is the
prose style of Swinburne, and the content is not, in an exact sense,
criticism. The faults of style are, of course, personal; the tumultuous
outcry of adjectives, the headstrong rush of undisciplined sentences,
are the index to the impatience and perhaps laziness of a disorderly
mind. But the style has one positive merit: it allows us to know that
Swinburne was writing not to establish a critical reputation, not to
instruct a docile public, but as a poet his notes upon poets whom he
admired. And whatever our opinion of Swinburnes verse, the notes upon
poets by a poet of Swinburnes dimensions must be read with attention
and respect.

In saying that Swinburnes essays have the value of notes of an
important poet upon important poets, we must place a check upon our
expectancy. He read everything, and he read with the single interest in
finding literature. The critics of the romantic period were pioneers,
and exhibit the fallibility of discoverers. The selections of Lamb are a
successful effort of good taste, but anyone who has referred to them
after a thorough reading of any of the poets included must have found
that some of the best passageswhich must literally have stared Lamb in
the faceare omitted, while sometimes others of less value are included.
Hazlitt, who committed himself to the judgment that the _Maids Tragedy_
is one of the poorest of Beaumont and Fletchers plays, has no connected
message to deliver. Coleridges remarkstoo few and scatteredhave
permanent truth; but on some of the greatest names he passes no remark,
and of some of the best plays was perhaps ignorant or ill-informed. But
compared with Swinburne, Coleridge writes much more as a poet might be
expected to write about poets. Of Massingers verse Swinburne says:

    It is more serviceable, more businesslike, more eloquently
    practical, and more rhetorically effusivebut never effusive beyond
    the bounds of effective rhetoricthan the style of any Shakespearean
    or of any Jonsonian dramatist.

It is impossible to tell whether Webster would have found the style of
Massinger more serviceable than his own for the last act of the _White
Devil_, and indeed difficult to decide what serviceable here means;
but it is quite clear what Coleridge means when he says that Massingers
style

    is much more easily constructed [than Shakespeares], and may be
    more successfully adopted by writers in the present day.

Coleridge is writing as a professional with his eye on the technique. I
do not know from what writing of Coleridge Swinburne draws the assertion
that Massinger often deals in exaggerated passion, but in the essay
from which Swinburne quotes elsewhere Coleridge merely speaks of the
unnaturally irrational passions, a phrase much more defensible. Upon
the whole, the two poets are in harmony upon the subject of Massinger;
and although Coleridge has said more in five pages, and said it more
clearly, than Swinburne in thirty-nine, the essay of Swinburne is by no
means otiose: it is more stimulating than Coleridges, and the
stimulation is never misleading. With all his superlatives, his
judgment, if carefully scrutinized, appears temperate and just.

With all his justness of judgment, however, Swinburne is an appreciator
and not a critic. In the whole range of literature covered, Swinburne
makes hardly more than two judgments which can be reversed or even
questioned: one, that Lyly is insignificant as a dramatist, and the
other, that Shirley was probably unaffected by Webster. The _Cardinal_
is not a cast of the _Duchess of Malfi_, certainly; but when Shirley
wrote

        the mist is risen, and theres none
    To steer my wandering bark. (_Dies._)

he was probably affected by

    My soul, like to a ship in a black storm,
    Is driven, I know not whither.

Swinburnes judgment is generally sound, his taste sensitive and
discriminating. And we cannot say that his thinking is faulty or
perverseup to the point at which it is thinking. But Swinburne stops
thinking just at the moment when we are most zealous to go on. And this
arrest, while it does not vitiate his work, makes it an introduction
rather than a statement.

We are aware, after the _Contemporaries of Shakespeare_ and the _Age of
Shakespeare_ and the books on Shakespeare and Jonson, that there is
something unsatisfactory in the way in which Swinburne was interested in
these people; we suspect that his interest was never articulately
formulated in his mind or consciously directed to any purpose. He makes
his way, or loses it, between two paths of definite direction. He might
as a poet have concentrated his attention upon the technical problems
solved or tackled by these men; he might have traced for us the
development of blank verse from Sackville to the mature Shakespeare, and
its degeneration from Shakespeare to Milton. Or he might have studied
through the literature to the mind of that century; he might, by
dissection and analysis, have helped us to some insight into the feeling
and thought which we seem to have left so far away. In either case, you
would have had at least the excitement of following the movements of an
important mind groping towards important conclusions. As it is, there
are to be no conclusions, except that Elizabethan literature is very
great, and that you can have pleasure and even ecstasy from it, because
a sensitive poetic talent has had the experience. One is in risk of
becoming fatigued by a hubbub that does not march; the drum is beaten,
but the procession does not advance.

If, for example, Swinburnes interest was in poetry, why devote an essay
to Brome? The opening scene of the _Sparagus Garden_, says Swinburne,
is as happily humorous and as vividly natural as that of any more
famous comedy. The scene is both humorous and natural. Brome deserves
to be more read than he is, and first of all to be more accessible than
he is. But Swinburne ought to suggest or imply (I do not say impose) a
reason for reading the _Sparagus Garden_ or the _Antipodes_, more
sufficient than any he has provided. No doubt such reason could be
found.

When it is a matter of pronouncing judgment between two poets, Swinburne
is almost unerring. He is certainly right in putting Webster above
Tourneur, Tourneur above Ford, and Ford above Shirley. He weighs
accurately the good and evil in Fletcher: he perceives the essential
theatricality, but his comparison of the _Faithful Shepherdess_ with
_Comus_ is a judgment no word of which can be improved upon:

    The difference between this poem [_i.e._ the _Faithful Shepherdess_]
    and Miltons exquisitely imitative _Comus_ is the difference between
    a rose with a leaf or two faded or falling, but still fragrant and
    radiant, and the faultless but scentless reproduction of a rose in
    academic wax for the admiration and imitation of such craftsmen as
    must confine their ambition to the laurels of a college or the
    plaudits of a school.

In the longest and most important essay in the _Contemporaries of
Shakespeare_, the essay on Chapman, there are many such sentences of
sound judgment forcibly expressed. The essay is the best we have on that
great poet. It communicates the sense of dignity and mass which we
receive from Chapman. But it also illustrates Swinburnes infirmities.
Swinburne was not tormented by the restless desire to penetrate to the
heart and marrow of a poet, any more than he was tormented by the desire
to render the finest shades of difference and resemblance between
several poets. Chapman is a difficult author, as Swinburne says; he is
far more difficult than Jonson, to whom he bears only a superficial
likeness. He is difficult beyond his obscurity. He is difficult partly
through his possession of a quality comparatively deficient in Jonson,
but which was nevertheless a quality of the age. It is strange that
Swinburne should have hinted at a similarity to Jonson and not mentioned
a far more striking affinity of Chapmansthat is, Donne. The man who
wrote

    Guise, O my lord, how shall I cast from me
    The bands and coverts hindering me from thee?
    The garment or the cover of the mind
    The humane soul is; of the soul, the spirit
    The proper robe is; of the spirit, the blood;
    And of the blood, the body is the shroud:

and

    Nothing is made of nought, of all things made,
    Their abstract being a dream but of a shade,

is unquestionably kin to Donne. The quality in question is not peculiar
to Donne and Chapman. In common with the greatestMarlowe, Webster,
Tourneur, and Shakespearethey had a quality of sensuous thought, or of
thinking through the senses, or of the senses thinking, of which the
exact formula remains to be defined. If you look for it in Shelley or
Beddoes, both of whom in very different ways recaptured something of the
Elizabethan inspiration, you will not find it, though you may find other
qualities instead. There is a trace of it only in Keats, and, derived
from a different source, in Rossetti. You will not find it in the _Duke
of Gandia_. Swinburnes essay would have been all the better if he had
applied himself to the solution of problems like this.

He did not apply himself to this sort of problem because this was not
the sort of problem that interested him. The author of Swinburnes
critical essays is also the author of Swinburnes verse: if you hold the
opinion that Swinburne was a very great poet, you can hardly deny him
the title of a great critic. There is the same curious mixture of
qualities to produce Swinburnes own effect, resulting in the same blur,
which only the vigour of the colours fixes. His great merit as a critic
is really one which, like many signal virtues, can be stated so simply
as to appear flat. It is that he was sufficiently interested in his
subject-matter and knew quite enough about it; and this is a rare
combination in English criticism. Our critics are often interested in
extracting something from their subject which is not fairly in it. And
it is because this elementary virtue is so rare that Swinburne must take
a very respectable place as a critic. Critics are often interestedbut
not quite in the nominal subject, often in something a little beside the
point; they are often learnedbut not quite to the point either.
(Swinburne knew some of the plays almost by heart.) Can this particular
virtue at which we have glanced be attributed to Walter Pater? or to
Professor Bradley? or to Swinburnes editor?


                         A Romantic Aristocrat


It is impossible to overlook the merits of scholarship and criticism
exhibited by George Wyndhams posthumous book, and it is impossible to
deal with the book purely on its merits of scholarship and criticism. To
attempt to do so would in the first place be unfair, as the book is a
posthumous work, and posthumous books demand some personal attention to
their writers. This book is a collection of essays and addresses,
arranged in their present order by Mr. Whibley; they were intended by
their author to be remodelled into a volume on romantic literature;
they move from an ingenious search for the date of the beginning of
Romanticism, through the French and English Renaissance, to Sir Walter
Scott. In the second place, these essays represent the literary work of
a man who gained his chief distinction in political life. In the third
place, this man stands for a type, an English type. The type is
interesting and will probably become extinct. It is natural, therefore,
that our primary interest in the essays should be an interest in George
Wyndham.

Mr. Charles Whibley, in an introduction the tone of which is well suited
to the matter, has several sentences which throw light on Wyndhams
personality. What issues with surprising clearness from Mr. Whibleys
sketch is the unity of Wyndhams mind, the identity of his mind as it
engaged in apparently unrelated occupations. Wyndham left Eton for the
army; in barracks he taught himself Italian, and filled his leisure
with the reading of history and poetry. After this Coldstream culture
there was a campaign in Egypt; later, service in South Africa
accompanied by a copy of Virgil. There was a career in the Commons, a
conspicuous career as Irish Secretary. Finally, there was a career as a
landowner2400 acres. And throughout these careers George Wyndham went
on not only accumulating books but reading them, and occasionally
writing about them. He was a man of character, a man of energy. Mr.
Whibley is quite credible when he says:

    Literature was for him no parergon, no mere way of escape from
    politics. If he was an amateur in feeling, he was a craftsman in
    execution;

and, more significantly,

    With the same zest that he read and discoursed upon _A Winters
    Tale_ or _Troilus and Cressida_, he rode to hounds, or threw himself
    with a kind of fury into a point to point, or made a speech at the
    hustings, or sat late in the night talking with a friend.

From these and other sentences we chart the mind of George Wyndham, and
the key to its topography is the fact that his literature and his
politics and his country life are one and the same thing. They are not
in separate compartments, they are one career. Together they made up his
world: literature, politics, riding to hounds. In the real world these
things have nothing to do with each other. But we cannot believe that
George Wyndham lived in the real world. And this is implied in Mr.
Whibleys remark that:

    George Wyndham was by character and training a romantic. He looked
    with wonder upon the world as upon a fairyland.

Here is the manifestation of type.

There must probably be conceded to history a few many-sided men.
Perhaps Leonardo da Vinci was such. George Wyndham was not a man on the
scale of Leonardo, and his writings give a very different effect from
Leonardos notebooks. Leonardo turned to art or science, and each was
what it was and not another thing. But Leonardo was Leonardo: he had no
father to speak of, he was hardly a citizen, and he had no stake in the
community. He lived in no fairyland, but his mind went out and became a
part of things. George Wyndham was Gentry. He was chivalrous, the world
was an adventure of himself. It is characteristic that on embarking as a
subaltern for Egypt he wrote enthusiastically:

    I do not suppose that any expedition since the days of Roman
    governors of provinces has started with such magnificence; we might
    have been Antony going to Egypt in a purple-sailed galley.

This is precisely the spirit which animates his appreciation of the
Elizabethans and of Walter Scott; which guides him toward Hakluyt and
North. Wyndham was enthusiastic, he was a Romantic, he was an
Imperialist, and he was quite naturally a literary pupil of W. E.
Henley. Wyndham was a scholar, but his scholarship is incidental; he was
a good critic, within the range allowed him by his enthusiasms; but it
is neither as Scholar nor as Critic that we can criticize him. We can
criticize his writings only as the expression of this peculiar English
type, the aristocrat, the Imperialist, the Romantic, riding to hounds
across his prose, looking with wonder upon the world as upon a
fairyland.

Because he belongs to this type, Wyndham wrote enthusiastically and well
about Norths Plutarch. The romance of the ancient world becomes more
romantic in the idiomatic prose of North; the heroes are not merely
Greek and Roman heroes, but Elizabethan heroes as well; the romantic
fusion allured Wyndham. The charms of North could not be expounded more
delightfully, more seductively, with more gusto, than they are in
Wyndhams essay. He appreciates the battles, the torchlight, the dead
sound of drums, the white, worn face of Cicero in his flight peering
from his litter; he appreciates the sharp brusque phrase of North: he
roundly trussed them up and hung them by their necks. And Wyndham is
learned. Here, as in his essays on the Pliade and Shakespeare, the man
has read everything, with a labour that only whets his enjoyment of the
best. There are two defects: a lack of balance and a lack of critical
profundity. The lack of balance peeps through Wyndhams condemnation of
an obviously inferior translation of Plutarch: He dedicated the
superfluity of his leisure to enjoyment, and used his Lamia, says the
bad translator. North: he took pleasure of Lamia. Wyndham makes a set
upon the bad translator. But he forgets that dedicated the superfluity
of his leisure is such a phrase as Gibbon would have warmed to life and
wit, and that a history, in the modern sense, could not be written in
the style of North. Wyndham forgets, in short, that it is not, in the
end, periods and traditions but individual men who write great prose.
For Wyndham is himself a period and a tradition.

The lack of balance is to be suspected elsewhere. Wyndham _likes_ the
best, but he likes a good deal. There is no conclusive evidence that he
realized all the difference, the gulf of difference between lines like:

    En lan trentiesme de mon aage
    Que toutes mes hontes jay beues;

and even the very best of Ronsard or Bellay, such as:

    Le temps sen va, le temps sen va, madame;
    Las! le temps, non, mais nous nous en allons
    Et tost serons estendus sous la lame.

We should not gather from Wyndhams essay that the _Phnix and Turtle_
is a great poem, far finer than _Venus and Adonis_; but what he says
about _Venus and Adonis_ is worth reading, for Wyndham is very sharp in
perceiving the neglected beauties of the second-rate. There is nothing
to show the gulf of difference between Shakespeares sonnets and those
of any other Elizabethan. Wyndham overrates Sidney, and in his
references to Elizabethan writings on the theory of poetry omits mention
of the essay by Campion, an abler and more daring though less
common-sense study than Daniels. He speaks a few words for Drayton, but
has not noticed that the only good lines (with the exception of one
sonnet which may be an accident) in Draytons dreary sequence of Ideas
occur when Drayton drops his costume for a moment and talks in terms of
actuality:

    Lastly, mine eyes amazedly have seen
    Essex great fall; Tyrone his peace to gain;
    The quiet end of that long-living queen;
    The kings fair entry, and our peace with Spain.

More important than the lack of balance is the lack of critical
analysis. Wyndham had, as was indicated, a gusto for the Elizabethans.
His essay on the Poems of Shakespeare contains an extraordinary amount
of information. There is some interesting gossip about Mary Fitton and a
good anecdote of Sir William Knollys. But Wyndham misses what is the
cardinal point in criticizing the Elizabethans: we cannot grasp them,
understand them, without some understanding of the pathology of
rhetoric. Rhetoric, a particular form of rhetoric, was endemic, it
pervaded the whole organism; the healthy as well as the morbid tissues
were built up on it. We cannot grapple with even the simplest and most
conversational lines in Tudor and early Stuart drama without having
diagnosed the rhetoric in the sixteenth and seventeenth-century mind.
Even when we come across lines like:

    Theres a plumber laying pipes in my guts, it scalds,

we must not allow ourselves to forget the rhetorical basis any more than
when we read:

    Come, let us march against the powers of heaven
    And set black streamers in the firmament
    To signify the slaughter of the gods.

An understanding of Elizabethan rhetoric is as essential to the
appreciation of Elizabethan literature as an understanding of Victorian
sentiment is essential to the appreciation of Victorian literature and
of George Wyndham.

Wyndham was a Romantic; the only cure for Romanticism is to analyse it.
What is permanent and good in Romanticism is curiosity

                               ... lardore
    Ch l ebbe a divenir del mondo esperto
    E degli vizii umani e del valore

a curiosity which recognizes that any life, if accurately and profoundly
penetrated, is interesting and always strange. Romanticism is a short
cut to the strangeness without the reality, and it leads its disciples
only back upon themselves. George Wyndham had curiosity, but he employed
it romantically, not to penetrate the real world, but to complete the
varied features of the world he made for himself. It would be of
interest to divagate from literature to politics and inquire to what
extent Romanticism is incorporate in Imperialism; to inquire to what
extent Romanticism has possessed the imagination of Imperialists, and to
what extent it was made use of by Disraeli. But this is quite another
matter: there may be a good deal to be said for Romanticism in life,
there is no place for it in letters. Not that we need conclude that a
man of George Wyndhams antecedents and traditions must inevitably be a
Romanticist writer. But this is the case when such a man plants himself
firmly in his awareness of caste, when he says The gentry must not
abdicate. In politics this may be an admirable formula. It will not do
in literature. The Arts insist that a man shall dispose of all that he
has, even of his family tree, and follow art alone. For they require
that a man be not a member of a family or of a caste or of a party or of
a coterie, but simply and solely himself. A man like Wyndham brings
several virtues into literature. But there is only one man better and
more uncommon than the patrician, and that is the Individual.


                           The Local Flavour


In a world which is chiefly occupied with the task of keeping up to date
with itself, it is a satisfaction to know that there is at least one man
who has not only read but enjoyed, and not only enjoyed but read, such
authors as Petronius and Herondas. That is Mr. Charles Whibley, and
there are two statements to make about him: that he is not a critic, and
that he is something which is almost as rare, if not quite as precious.
He has apparently read and enjoyed a great deal of English literature,
and the part of it that he has most enjoyed is the literature of the
great ages, the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. We may opine that
Mr. Whibley has not uttered a single important original judgment upon
any of this literature. On the other hand, how many have done so? Mr.
Whibley is not a critic of men or of books; but he convinces us that if
we read the books that he has read we should find them as delightful as
he has found them; and if we read them we can form our own opinions. And
if he has not the balance of the critic, he has some other equipoise of
his own. It is partly that his tastes are not puritanical, that he can
talk about Restoration dramatists and others without apologizing for
their indecency; it is partly his sense for the best local and
temporal flavours; it is partly his healthy appetite.

A combination of non-critical, rather than uncritical, qualities made
Mr. Whibley the most appropriate person in the world for the work by
which he is best known. We should be more grateful for the Tudor
Translations Series if we could find copies to be bought, and if we
could afford to buy them when we found them. But that is not Mr.
Whibleys fault. The introductions which he wrote for some of the
translators are all that such introductions should be. His Urquharts
_Rabelais_ contains all the irrelevant information about that writer
which is what is wanted to stimulate a taste for him. After reading the
introduction, to read Urquhart was the only pleasure in life. And
therefore, in a country destitute of living criticism, Mr. Whibley is a
useful person: for the first thing is that English literature should be
read at all. The few people who talk intelligently about Stendhal and
Flaubert and James know this; but the larger number of people who skim
the conversation of the former do not know enough of English literature
to be even insular. There are two ways in which a writer may lead us to
profit by the work of dead writers. One is by isolating the essential,
by pointing out the most intense in various kinds and separating it from
the accidents of environment. This method is helpful only to the more
intelligent people, who are capable of a unique enjoyment of perfect
expression, and it concentrates on the very best in any art. The other
method, that of Mr. Whibley, is to communicate a taste for the
periodand for the best of the period so far as it is of that period.
That is not very easy either. For a pure journalist will not know any
period well enough; a pure dilettante will know it too egotistically, as
a fashion of his own. Mr. Whibley is really interested; and he has
escaped, without any programme of revolt, from the present century into
those of Tudor and Stuart. He escapes, and perhaps leads others, by
virtue of a taste which is not exactly a literary taste.

The Tudor Translations form part of a pronounced taste. Some are
better written than others. There is, of course, a world of
differenceof which Mr. Whibley is perhaps unawarebetween even Florio
and his original. The French of Montaigne is a mature language, and the
English of Florios living translation is not. Montaigne could be
translated into the English of his time, but a similar work could not
have been written in it. But as the English language matured it lost
something that Florio and all his inferior colleagues had, and that they
had in common with the language of Montaigne. It was not only the
language, but the time. The prose of that age had life, a life to which
later ages could not add, from which they could only take away. You find
the same life, the same abundance, in Montaigne and Brantme, the
alteration in Rochefoucauld as in Hobbes, the desiccation in the classic
prose of both languages, in Voltaire and in Gibbon. Only, the French was
originally richer and more maturealready in Joinville and Comminesand
we have no prose to compare with Montaigne and Rabelais. If Mr. Whibley
had analysed this vitality, and told us why Holland and Underdowne,
Nashe and Martin Marprelate are still worth reading, then he could have
shown us how to recognize this quality when it, or something like it,
appears in our own lifetime. But Mr. Whibley is not an analyst. His
taste, even, becomes less certain as he fixes it on individuals within
his period. On Surreys blank verse he is feeble; he does not even give
Surrey the credit of having anticipated some of Tennysons best effects.
He has no praise for Golding, quite one of the best of the verse
translators; he apologizes for him by saying that Ovid demands no
strength or energy! There is strength and energy, at least, in Marlowes
_Amores_. And he omits mention of Gawain Douglas, who, though he wrote
in Scots, was surely a Tudor translator. Characteristically, Mr.
Whibley praises Chapman because

    it gives proof of an abounding life, a quenchless energy. There is a
    grandeur and spirit in Chapmans rendering, not unworthy the
    original....

This is commonplace, and it is uncritical. And a critic would not use so
careless a phrase as Tassos masterpiece. The essay on Congreve does
not add much to our understanding:

    And so he set upon the boards a set of men and women of quick brains
    and cynical humours, who talked with the brilliance and rapidity
    wherewith the finished swordsman fences.

We have heard of this conversation like fencing before. And the
suspicion is in our breast that Mr. Whibley might admire George
Meredith. The essay on Ralegh gives still less. The reality of that
pleasing pirate and monopolist has escaped, and only the national hero
is left. And yet Ralegh, and Swift, and Congreve, and the underworld of
sixteenth and seventeenth-century letters, are somehow kept alive by
what Mr. Whibley says of them.

Accordingly, Mr. Whibley does not disappear in the jungle of journalism
and false criticism; he deserves a place upon the shelves of those who
care for English literature. He has the first requisite of a critic:
interest in his subject, and ability to communicate an interest in it.
His defects are both of intellect and feeling. He has no dissociative
faculty. There were very definite vices and definite shortcomings and
immaturities in the literature he admires; and as he is not the person
to tell us of the vices and shortcomings, he is not the person to lay
before us the work of absolutely the finest quality. He exercises
neither of the tools of the critic: comparison and analysis. He has not
the austerity of passion which can detect unerringly the transition from
work of eternal intensity to work that is merely beautiful, and from
work that is beautiful to work that is merely charming. For the critic
needs to be able not only to saturate himself in the spirit and the
fashion of a timethe local flavourbut also to separate himself
suddenly from it in appreciation of the highest creative work.

And he needs something else that Mr. Whibley lacks: a creative interest,
a focus upon the immediate future. The important critic is the person
who is absorbed in the present problems of art, and who wishes to bring
the forces of the past to bear upon the solution of these problems. If
the critic consider Congreve, for instance, he will have always at the
back of his mind the question: What has Congreve got that is pertinent
to our dramatic art? Even if he is solely engaged in trying to
understand Congreve, this will make all the difference: inasmuch as to
understand anything is to understand from a point of view. Most critics
have some creative interestit may be, instead of an interest in any
art, an interest (like Mr. Paul Mores) in morals. These remarks were
introduced only to assist in giving the books of Mr. Whibley a place, a
particular but unticketed place, neither with criticism, nor with
history, nor with plain journalism; and the trouble would not have been
taken if the books were not thought to be worth placing.


                     A Note on the American Critic


This gallery of critics is not intended to be in any sense complete. But
having dealt with three English writers of what may be called critical
prose, ones mind becomes conscious of the fact that they have something
in common, and, trying to perceive more clearly what this community is,
and suspecting that it is a national quality, one is impelled to
meditate upon the strongest contrast possible. Hence these comments upon
two American critics and one French critic, which would not take exactly
this form without the contrast at which I have hinted.

Mr. Paul More is the author of a number of volumes which he perhaps
hopes will break the record of mass established by the complete works of
Sainte-Beuve. The comparison with Sainte-Beuve is by no means trivial,
for Mr. More, and Professor Irving Babbitt also, are admirers of the
voluminous Frenchman. Not only are they admirers, but their admiration
is perhaps a clue both to much of their merit and to some of their
defects. In the first place, both of these writers have given much more
attention to French criticism, to the study of French standards of
writing and of thought, than any of the notable English critics since
Arnold; they are therefore much nearer to the European current, although
they exhibit faults which are definitely transatlantic and which
definitely keep them out of it. The French influence is traceable in
their devotion to ideas and their interest in problems of art and life
as problems which exist and can be handled apart from their relations to
the critics private temperament. With Swinburne, the criticism of
Elizabethan literature has the interest of a passion, it has the
interest for us of any writing by an intellectual man who is genuinely
moved by certain poetry. Swinburnes intelligence is not defective, it
is impure. There are few ideas in Swinburnes critical writings which
stand forth luminous with an independent life of their own, so true that
one forgets the author in the statement. Swinburnes words must always
be referred back to Swinburne himself. And if literature is to Swinburne
merely a passion, we are tempted to say that to George Wyndham it was a
hobby, and to Mr. Whibley almost a charming showmans show (we are
charmed by the urbanity of the showman). The two latter have gusto, but
gusto is no equivalent for taste; it depends too much upon the appetite
and the digestion of the feeder. And with one or two other writers, whom
I have not had occasion to discuss, literature is not so much a
collection of valuable porcelain as an institutionaccepted, that is to
say, with the same gravity as the establishments of Church and State.
That is, in other words, the essentially uncritical attitude. In all of
these attitudes the English critic is the victim of his temperament. He
may acquire great erudition, but erudition easily becomes a hobby; it is
useless unless it enables us to see literature all round, to detach it
from ourselves, to reach a state of pure contemplation.

Now Mr. More and Mr. Babbitt have endeavoured to establish a criticism
which should be independent of temperament. This is in itself a
considerable merit. But at this point Mr. More particularly has been led
astray, oddly enough, by his guide Sainte-Beuve. Neither Mr. More nor
Sainte-Beuve is primarily interested in art. Of the latter M. Benda has
well observed that

    on saitet cest certainement un des grands lments de son
    succscombien dtudes lillustre critique consacre  des auteurs
    dont limportance littraire est quasi nulle (femmes, magistrats,
    courtisans, militaires), mais dont les crits lui sont une occasion
    de pourtraiturer une me; combien volontiers, pour les matres, il
    sattache  leurs productions secondaires, notes, brouillons,
    lettres intimes, plutt qu leurs grandes uvres, souvent beaucoup
    moins expressives, en effet, de leur psychologie.

Mr. More is not, like Sainte-Beuve, primarily interested in psychology
or in human beings; Mr. More is primarily a moralist, which is a worthy
and serious thing to be. The trouble with Mr. More is that you cannot
disperse a theory or point of view of morals over a vast number of
essays on a great variety of important figures in literature, unless you
can give some more particular interest as well. Sainte-Beuve has his
particularized interest in human beings; another criticsay Remy de
Gourmontmay have something to say always about the art of a writer
which will make our enjoyment of that writer more conscious and more
intelligent. But the pure moralist in lettersthe moralist is useful to
the creator as well as the reader of poetrymust be more concise, for we
must have the pleasure of inspecting the beauty of his structure. And
here M. Julien Benda has a great advantage over Mr. More; his thought
may be less profound, but it has more formal beauty.

Mr. Irving Babbitt, who shares so many of the ideals and opinions of Mr.
More that their names must be coupled, has expressed his thought more
abstractly and with more form, and is free from a mystical impulse which
occasionally gets out of Mr. Mores hand. He appears, more clearly than
Mr. More, and certainly more clearly than any critic of equal authority
in America or England, to perceive Europe as a whole; he has the
cosmopolitan mind and a tendency to seek the centre. His few books are
important, and would be more important if he preached of discipline in a
more disciplined style. Although he also is an admirer of Sainte-Beuve,
he would probably subscribe to this admirable paragraph of Othenin
dHaussonville:[4]

Footnote 4:

  _Revue des Deux Mondes_, fevr. 1875, quoted by Benda, _Belphgor_, p.
  140.

    Il y a une beaut littraire, impersonnelle en quelque sorte,
    parfaitement distincte de lauteur lui-mme et de son organisation,
    beaut qui a sa raison dtre et ses lois, dont la critique est
    tenue de rendre compte. Et si la critique considre cette tche
    comme au-dessous delle, si cest affaire  la rhtorique et  ce
    que Sainte-Beuve appelle ddaigneusement les Quintilien, alors la
    rhetorique a du bon et les Quintilien ne sont pas  ddaigner.

There may be several critics in England who would applaud this notion;
there are very few who show any evidence of its apprehension in their
writings. But Mr. More and Mr. Babbitt, whatever their actual tastes,
and although they are not primarily occupied with art, are on the side
of the artist. And the side of the artist is not the side which in
England is often associated with critical writing. As Mr. More has
pointed out in an interesting essay, there is a vital weakness in
Arnolds definition of criticism as the disinterested endeavour to know
the best that is known and thought in the world, irrespectively of
practice, politics, and everything of the kind. The disinterested
endeavour to know is only a prerequisite of the _critic_, and is not
_criticism_, which may be the result of such an endeavour. Arnold states
the work of the critic merely in terms of the personal ideal, an ideal
for oneselfand an ideal for oneself is not disinterested. Here Arnold
is the Briton rather than the European.

Mr. More indicates his own attitude in praising those whom he elevates
to the position of masters of criticism:

    If they deal much with the criticism of literature, this is because
    in literature more manifestly than anywhere else life displays its
    infinitely varied motives and results; and their practice is always
    to render literature itself more consciously a criticism of life.

Criticism of life is a facile phrase, and at most only represents one
aspect of great literature, if it does not assign to the term
criticism itself a generality which robs it of precision. Mr. More
has, it seems to me, in this sentence just failed to put his finger on
the right seriousness of great literary art: the seriousness which we
find in Villons _Testament_ and which is conspicuously absent from _In
Memoriam_; or the seriousness which controls _Amos Barton_ and not _The
Mill on the Floss_.

It is a pity that Mr. More does not write a little oftener about the
great literary artists, it is a pity that he takes the reputations of
the world too solemnly. This is probably due in part to remoteness in
space from the European centre. But it must be observed that English
solemnity and American solemnity are very different. I do not propose to
analyse the difference (it would be a valuable chapter in social
history); the American solemnity, it is enough to say, is more
primitive, more academic, more like that of the German professor. But it
is not the fault of Mr. More or Mr. Babbitt that the culture of ideas
has only been able to survive in America in the unfavourable atmosphere
of the university.


                        The French Intelligence


As the inspection of types of English irresistibly provoked a glance at
two American critics, so the inspection of the latter leads our
attention to the French. M. Julien Benda has the formal beauty which the
American critics lack, and a close affinity to them in point of view. He
restricts himself, perhaps, to a narrower field of ideas, but within
that field he manipulates the ideas with a very exceptional cogency and
clarity. To notice his last book (_Belphgor: essai sur lesthtique de
la prsente socit franaise_) would be to quote from it. M. Benda is
not like Remy de Gourmont, the critical consciousness of a generation,
he could not supply the conscious formulas of a sensibility in process
of formation; he is rather the ideal scavenger of the rubbish of our
time. Much of his analysis of the decadence of contemporary French
society could be applied to London, although differences are observable
from his diagnosis.

    Quant  la socit en elle-mme, on peut prvoir que ce soin quelle
    met  prouver de lmoi par lart, devenant cause  son tour, y
    rendra la soif de ce plaisir de plus en plus intense, lapplication
    a la satisfaire de plus en plus jalouse et plus perfectionne. On
    entrevoit le jour o la bonne socit franaise repudiera encore le
    peu quelle supporte aujourdhui dides et dorganisation dans
    lart, et ne se passionera plus que pour des gestes de comdiens,
    pour des impressions de femmes ou denfants, pour des rugissements
    de lyriques, pour des extases de fanatiques....

Almost the only person who has ever figured in England and attempted a
task at all similar to that of M. Benda is Matthew Arnold. Matthew
Arnold was intelligent, and by so much difference as the presence of one
intelligent man makes, our age is inferior to that of Arnold. But what
an advantage a man like M. Benda has over Arnold. It is not simply that
he has a critical tradition behind him, and that Arnold is using a
language which constantly tempts the user away from dispassionate
exposition into sarcasm and diatribe, a language less fitted for
criticism than the English of the eighteenth century. It is that the
follies and stupidities of the French, no matter how base, express
themselves in the form of ideasBergsonism itself is an intellectual
construction, and the mondaines who attended lectures at the College de
France were in a sense using their minds. A man of ideas needs ideas, or
pseudo-ideas, to fight against. And Arnold lacked the active resistance
which is necessary to keep a mind at its sharpest.

A society in which a mind like M. Bendas can exercise itself, and in
which there are persons like M. Benda, is one which facilitates the task
of the creative artist. M. Benda cannot be attached, like Gourmont, to
any creative group. He does not wholly partake in that conscious
creation of the field of the present out of the past which Mr. More
considers to be part of the work of the critic. But in analysing the
maladies of the second-rate or corrupt literature of the time he makes
the labour of the creative artist lighter. The Charles Louis Philippes
of English literature are never done with, because there is no one to
kill their reputations; we still hear that George Meredith is a master
of prose, or even a profound philosopher. The creative artist in England
finds himself compelled, or at least tempted, to spend much of his time
and energy in criticism that he might reserve for the perfecting of his
proper work: simply because there is no one else to do it.




                  Tradition and the Individual Talent


                                   I

In English writing we seldom speak of tradition, though we occasionally
apply its name in deploring its absence. We cannot refer to the
tradition or to a tradition; at most, we employ the adjective in
saying that the poetry of So-and-so is traditional or even too
traditional. Seldom, perhaps, does the word appear except in a phrase
of censure. If otherwise, it is vaguely approbative, with the
implication, as to the work approved, of some pleasing archological
reconstruction. You can hardly make the word agreeable to English ears
without this comfortable reference to the reassuring science of
archology.

Certainly the word is not likely to appear in our appreciations of
living or dead writers. Every nation, every race, has not only its own
creative, but its own critical turn of mind; and is even more oblivious
of the shortcomings and limitations of its critical habits than of those
of its creative genius. We know, or think we know, from the enormous
mass of critical writing that has appeared in the French language the
critical method or habit of the French; we only conclude (we are such
unconscious people) that the French are more critical than we, and
sometimes even plume ourselves a little with the fact, as if the French
were the less spontaneous. Perhaps they are; but we might remind
ourselves that criticism is as inevitable as breathing, and that we
should be none the worse for articulating what passes in our minds when
we read a book and feel an emotion about it, for criticizing our own
minds in their work of criticism. One of the facts that might come to
light in this process is our tendency to insist, when we praise a poet,
upon those aspects of his work in which he least resembles anyone else.
In these aspects or parts of his work we pretend to find what is
individual, what is the peculiar essence of the man. We dwell with
satisfaction upon the poets difference from his predecessors,
especially his immediate predecessors; we endeavour to find something
that can be isolated in order to be enjoyed. Whereas if we approach a
poet without his prejudice we shall often find that not only the best,
but the most individual parts of his work may be those in which the dead
poets, his ancestors, assert their immortality most vigorously. And I do
not mean the impressionable period of adolescence, but the period of
full maturity.

Yet if the only form of tradition, of handing down, consisted in
following the ways of the immediate generation before us in a blind or
timid adherence to its successes, tradition should positively be
discouraged. We have seen many such simple currents soon lost in the
sand; and novelty is better than repetition. Tradition is a matter of
much wider significance. It cannot be inherited, and if you want it you
must obtain it by great labour. It involves, in the first place, the
historical sense, which we may call nearly indispensable to anyone who
would continue to be a poet beyond his twenty-fifth year; and the
historical sense involves a perception, not only of the pastness of the
past, but of its presence; the historical sense compels a man to write
not merely with his own generation in his bones, but with a feeling that
the whole of the literature of Europe from Homer and within it the whole
of the literature of his own country has a simultaneous existence and
composes a simultaneous order. This historical sense, which is a sense
of the timeless as well as of the temporal and of the timeless and of
the temporal together, is what makes a writer traditional. And it is at
the same time what makes a writer most acutely conscious of his place in
time, of his contemporaneity.

No poet, no artist of any art, has his complete meaning alone. His
significance, his appreciation is the appreciation of his relation to
the dead poets and artists. You cannot value him alone; you must set
him, for contrast and comparison, among the dead. I mean this as a
principle of aesthetic, not merely historical, criticism. The necessity
that he shall conform, that he shall cohere, is not one-sided; what
happens when a new work of art is created is something that happens
simultaneously to all the works of art which preceded it. The existing
monuments form an ideal order among themselves, which is modified by the
introduction of the new (the really new) work of art among them. The
existing order is complete before the new work arrives; for order to
persist after the supervention of novelty, the _whole_ existing order
must be, if ever so slightly, altered; and so the relations,
proportions, values of each work of art toward the whole are readjusted;
and this is conformity between the old and the new. Whoever has approved
this idea of order, of the form of European, of English literature, will
not find it preposterous that the past should be altered by the present
as much as the present is directed by the past. And the poet who is
aware of this will be aware of great difficulties and responsibilities.

In a peculiar sense he will be aware also that he must inevitably be
judged by the standards of the past. I say judged, not amputated, by
them; not judged to be as good as, or worse or better than, the dead;
and certainly not judged by the canons of dead critics. It is a
judgment, a comparison, in which two things are measured by each other.
To conform merely would be for the new work not really to conform at
all; it would not be new, and would therefore not be a work of art. And
we do not quite say that the new is more valuable because it fits in;
but its fitting in is a test of its valuea test, it is true, which can
only be slowly and cautiously applied, for we are none of us infallible
judges of conformity. We say: it appears to conform, and is perhaps
individual, or it appears individual, and may conform; but we are hardly
likely to find that it is one and not the other.

To proceed to a more intelligible exposition of the relation of the poet
to the past: he can neither take the past as a lump, an indiscriminate
bolus, nor can he form himself wholly on one or two private admirations,
nor can he form himself wholly upon one preferred period. The first
course is inadmissible, the second is an important experience of youth,
and the third is a pleasant and highly desirable supplement. The poet
must be very conscious of the main current, which does not at all flow
invariably through the most distinguished reputations. He must be quite
aware of the obvious fact that art never improves, but that the material
of art is never quite the same. He must be aware that the mind of
Europethe mind of his own countrya mind which he learns in time to be
much more important than his own private mindis a mind which changes,
and that this change is a development which abandons nothing _en route_,
which does not superannuate either Shakespeare, or Homer, or the rock
drawing of the Magdalenian draughtsmen. That this development,
refinement perhaps, complication certainly, is not, from the point of
view of the artist, any improvement. Perhaps not even an improvement
from the point of view of the psychologist or not to the extent which we
imagine; perhaps only in the end based upon a complication in economics
and machinery. But the difference between the present and the past is
that the conscious present is an awareness of the past in a way and to
an extent which the pasts awareness of itself cannot show.

Some one said: The dead writers are remote from us because we _know_ so
much more than they did. Precisely, and they are that which we know.

I am alive to a usual objection to what is clearly part of my programme
for the _mtier_ of poetry. The objection is that the doctrine requires
a ridiculous amount of erudition (pedantry), a claim which can be
rejected by appeal to the lives of poets in any pantheon. It will even
be affirmed that much learning deadens or perverts poetic sensibility.
While, however, we persist in believing that a poet ought to know as
much as will not encroach upon his necessary receptivity and necessary
laziness, it is not desirable to confine knowledge to whatever can be
put into a useful shape for examinations, drawing-rooms, or the still
more pretentious modes of publicity. Some can absorb knowledge, the more
tardy must sweat for it. Shakespeare acquired more essential history
from Plutarch than most men could from the whole British Museum. What is
to be insisted upon is that the poet must develop or procure the
consciousness of the past and that he should continue to develop this
consciousness throughout his career.

What happens is a continual surrender of himself as he is at the moment
to something which is more valuable. The progress of an artist is a
continual self-sacrifice, a continual extinction of personality.

There remains to define this process of depersonalization and its
relation to the sense of tradition. It is in this depersonalization that
art may be said to approach the condition of science. I shall,
therefore, invite you to consider, as a suggestive analogy, the action
which takes place when a bit of finely filiated platinum is introduced
into a chamber containing oxygen and sulphur dioxide.


                                   II

Honest criticism and sensitive appreciation is directed not upon the
poet but upon the poetry. If we attend to the confused cries of the
newspaper critics and the susurrus of popular repetition that follows,
we shall hear the names of poets in great numbers; if we seek not
Blue-book knowledge but the enjoyment of poetry, and ask for a poem, we
shall seldom find it. In the last article I tried to point out the
importance of the relation of the poem to other poems by other authors,
and suggested the conception of poetry as a living whole of all the
poetry that has ever been written. The other aspect of this Impersonal
theory of poetry is the relation of the poem to its author. And I
hinted, by an analogy, that the mind of the mature poet differs from
that of the immature one not precisely in any valuation of
personality, not being necessarily more interesting, or having more
to say, but rather by being a more finely perfected medium in which
special, or very varied, feelings are at liberty to enter into new
combinations.

The analogy was that of the catalyst. When the two gases previously
mentioned are mixed in the presence of a filament of platinum, they form
sulphurous acid. This combination takes place only if the platinum is
present; nevertheless the newly formed acid contains no trace of
platinum, and the platinum itself is apparently unaffected; has remained
inert, neutral, and unchanged. The mind of the poet is the shred of
platinum. It may partly or exclusively operate upon the experience of
the man himself; but, the more perfect the artist, the more completely
separate in him will be the man who suffers and the mind which creates;
the more perfectly will the mind digest and transmute the passions which
are its material.

The experience, you will notice, the elements which enter the presence
of the transforming catalyst, are of two kinds: emotions and feelings.
The effect of a work of art upon the person who enjoys it is an
experience different in kind from any experience not of art. It may be
formed out of one emotion, or may be a combination of several; and
various feelings, inhering for the writer in particular words or phrases
or images, may be added to compose the final result. Or great poetry may
be made without the direct use of any emotion whatever: composed out of
feelings solely. Canto XV of the _Inferno_ (Brunetto Latini) is a
working up of the emotion evident in the situation; but the effect,
though single as that of any work of art, is obtained by considerable
complexity of detail. The last quatrain gives an image, a feeling
attaching to an image, which came, which did not develop simply out of
what precedes, but which was probably in suspension in the poets mind
until the proper combination arrived for it to add itself to. The poets
mind is in fact a receptacle for seizing and storing up numberless
feelings, phrases, images, which remain there until all the particles
which can unite to form a new compound are present together.

If you compare several representative passages of the greatest poetry
you see how great is the variety of types of combination, and also how
completely any semi-ethical criterion of sublimity misses the mark.
For it is not the greatness, the intensity, of the emotions, the
components, but the intensity of the artistic process, the pressure, so
to speak, under which the fusion takes place, that counts. The episode
of Paolo and Francesca employs a definite emotion, but the intensity of
the poetry is something quite different from whatever intensity in the
supposed experience it may give the impression of. It is no more
intense, furthermore, than Canto XXVI, the voyage of Ulysses, which has
not the direct dependence upon an emotion. Great variety is possible in
the process of transmution of emotion: the murder of Agamemnon, or the
agony of Othello, gives an artistic effect apparently closer to a
possible original than the scenes from Dante. In the _Agamemnon_, the
artistic emotion approximates to the emotion of an actual spectator; in
_Othello_ to the emotion of the protagonist himself. But the difference
between art and the event is always absolute; the combination which is
the murder of Agamemnon is probably as complex as that which is the
voyage of Ulysses. In either case there has been a fusion of elements.
The ode of Keats contains a number of feelings which have nothing
particular to do with the nightingale, but which the nightingale,
partly, perhaps, because of its attractive name, and partly because of
its reputation, served to bring together.

The point of view which I am struggling to attack is perhaps related to
the metaphysical theory of the substantial unity of the soul: for my
meaning is, that the poet has, not a personality to express, but a
particular medium, which is only a medium and not a personality, in
which impressions and experiences combine in peculiar and unexpected
ways. Impressions and experiences which are important for the man may
take no place in the poetry, and those which become important in the
poetry may play quite a negligible part in the man, the personality.

I will quote a passage which is unfamiliar enough to be regarded with
fresh attention in the lightor darknessof these observations:

    And now methinks I could een chide myself
    For doating on her beauty, though her death
    Shall be revenged after no common action.
    Does the silkworm expend her yellow labours
    For thee? For thee does she undo herself?
    Are lordships sold to maintain ladyships
    For the poor benefit of a bewildering minute?
    Why does yon fellow falsify highways,
    And put his life between the judges lips,
    To refine such a thingkeeps horse and men
    To beat their valours for her?...

In this passage (as is evident if it is taken in its context) there is a
combination of positive and negative emotions: an intensely strong
attraction toward beauty and an equally intense fascination by the
ugliness which is contrasted with it and which destroys it. This balance
of contrasted emotion is in the dramatic situation to which the speech
is pertinent, but that situation alone is inadequate to it. This is, so
to speak, the structural emotion, provided by the drama. But the whole
effect, the dominant tone, is due to the fact that a number of floating
feelings, having an affinity to this emotion by no means superficially
evident, have combined with it to give us a new art emotion.

It is not in his personal emotions, the emotions provoked by particular
events in his life, that the poet is in any way remarkable or
interesting. His particular emotions may be simple, or crude, or flat.
The emotion in his poetry will be a very complex thing, but not with the
complexity of the emotions of people who have very complex or unusual
emotions in life. One error, in fact, of eccentricity in poetry is to
seek for new human emotions to express: and in this search for novelty
in the wrong place it discovers the perverse. The business of the poet
is not to find new emotions, but to use the ordinary ones and, in
working them up into poetry, to express feelings which are not in actual
emotions at all. And emotions which he has never experienced will serve
his turn as well as those familiar to him. Consequently, we must believe
that emotion recollected in tranquillity is an inexact formula. For it
is neither emotion, nor recollection, nor, without distortion of
meaning, tranquillity. It is a concentration, and a new thing resulting
from the concentration, of a very great number of experiences which to
the practical and active person would not seem to be experiences at all;
it is a concentration which does not happen consciously or of
deliberation. These experiences are not recollected, and they finally
unite in an atmosphere which is tranquil only in that it is a passive
attending upon the event. Of course this is not quite the whole story.
There is a great deal, in the writing of poetry, which must be conscious
and deliberate. In fact, the bad poet is usually unconscious where he
ought to be conscious, and conscious where he ought to be unconscious.
Both errors tend to make him personal. Poetry is not a turning loose
of emotion, but an escape from emotion; it is not the expression of
personality, but an escape from personality. But, of course, only those
who have personality and emotions know what it means to want to escape
from these things.


                                  III

        

This essay proposes to halt at the frontier of metaphysics or mysticism,
and confine itself to such practical conclusions as can be applied by
the responsible person interested in poetry. To divert interest from the
poet to the poetry is a laudable aim: for it would conduce to a juster
estimation of actual poetry, good and bad. There are many people who
appreciate the expression of sincere emotion in verse, and there is a
smaller number of people who can appreciate technical excellence. But
very few know when there is expression of _significant_ emotion, emotion
which has its life in the poem and not in the history of the poet. The
emotion of art is impersonal. And the poet cannot reach this
impersonality without surrendering himself wholly to the work to be
done. And he is not likely to know what is to be done unless he lives in
what is not merely the present, but the present moment of the past,
unless he is conscious, not of what is dead, but of what is already
living.




                   The Possibility of a Poetic Drama


The questionswhy there is no poetic drama to-day, how the stage has
lost all hold on literary art, why so many poetic plays are written
which can only be read, and read, if at all, without pleasurehave
become insipid, almost academic. The usual conclusion is either that
conditions are too much for us, or that we really prefer other types
of literature, or simply that we are uninspired. As for the last
alternative, it is not to be entertained; as for the second, what type
do we prefer?; and as for the first, no one has ever shown me
conditions, except of the most superficial. The reasons for raising
the question again are first that the majority, perhaps, certainly a
large number, of poets hanker for the stage; and second, that a not
negligible public appears to want verse plays. Surely there is some
legitimate craving, not restricted to a few persons, which only the
verse play can satisfy. And surely the critical attitude is to attempt
to analyse the conditions and the other data. If there comes to light
some conclusive obstacle, the investigation should at least help us to
turn our thoughts to more profitable pursuits; and if there is not, we
may hope to arrive eventually at some statement of conditions which
might be altered. Possibly we shall find that our incapacity has a
deeper source: the arts have at times flourished when there was no
drama; possibly we are incompetent altogether; in that case the stage
will be, not the seat, but at all events a symptom, of the malady.

From the point of view of literature, the drama is only one among
several poetic forms. The epic, the ballad, the chanson de geste, the
forms of Provence and of Tuscany, all found their perfection by serving
particular societies. The forms of Ovid, Catullus, Propertius, served a
society different, and in some respects more civilized, than any of
these; and in the society of Ovid the drama as a form of art was
comparatively insignificant. Nevertheless, the drama is perhaps the most
permanent, is capable of greater variation and of expressing more varied
types of society, than any other. It varied considerably in England
alone; but when one day it was discovered lifeless, subsequent forms
which had enjoyed a transitory life were dead too. I am not prepared to
undertake the historical survey; but I should say that the poetic
dramas autopsy was performed as much by Charles Lamb as by anyone else.
For a form is not wholly dead until it is known to be; and Lamb, by
exhuming the remains of dramatic life at its fullest, brought a
consciousness of the immense gap between present and past. It was
impossible to believe, after that, in a dramatic tradition. The
relation of Byrons _English Bards_ and the poems of Crabbe to the work
of Pope was a continuous tradition; but the relation of _The Cenci_ to
the great English drama is almost that of a reconstruction to an
original. By losing tradition, we lose our hold on the present; but so
far as there was any dramatic tradition in Shelleys day there was
nothing worth the keeping. There is all the difference between
preservation and restoration.

The Elizabethan Age in England was able to absorb a great quantity of
new thoughts and new images, almost dispensing with tradition, because
it had this great form of its own which imposed itself on everything
that came to it. Consequently, the blank verse of their plays
accomplished a subtlety and consciousness, even an intellectual power,
that no blank verse since has developed or even repeated; elsewhere this
age is crude, pedantic, or loutish in comparison with its contemporary
France or Italy. The nineteenth century had a good many fresh
impressions; but it had no form in which to confine them. Two men,
Wordsworth and Browning, hammered out forms for themselvespersonal
forms, _The Excursion_, _Sordello_, _The Ring and the Book_, _Dramatic
Monologues_; but no man can invent a form, create a taste for it, and
perfect it too. Tennyson, who might unquestionably have been a
consummate master of minor forms, took to turning out large patterns on
a machine. As for Keats and Shelley, they were too young to be judged,
and they were trying one form after another.

These poets were certainly obliged to consume vast energy in this
pursuit of form, which could never lead to a wholly satisfying result.
There has only been one Dante; and, after all, Dante had the benefit of
years of practice in forms employed and altered by numbers of
contemporaries and predecessors; he did not waste the years of youth in
metric invention; and when he came to the _Commedia_ he knew how to
pillage right and left. To have, given into ones hands, a crude form,
capable of indefinite refinement, and to be the person to see the
possibilitiesShakespeare was very fortunate. And it is perhaps the
craving for some such _donne_ which draws us on toward the present
mirage of poetic drama.

But it is now very questionable whether there are more than two or three
in the present generation who are _capable_, the least little bit, of
benefiting by such advantages were they given. At most two or three
actually devote themselves to this pursuit of form for which they have
little or no public recognition. To create a form is not merely to
invent a shape, a rhyme or rhythm. It is also the realization of the
whole appropriate content of this rhyme or rhythm. The sonnet of
Shakespeare is not merely such and such a pattern, but a precise way of
thinking and feeling. The _framework_ which was provided for the
Elizabethan dramatist was not merely blank verse and the five-act play
and the Elizabethan playhouse; it was not merely the plotfor the poets
incorporated, remodelled, adapted or invented, as occasion suggested. It
was also the half-formed , the temper of the age (an unsatisfactory
phrase), a preparedness, a habit on the part of the public, to respond
to particular stimuli. There is a book to be written on the commonplaces
of any great dramatic period, the handling of Fate or Death, the
recurrence of mood, tone, situation. We should see then just how
_little_ each poet had to do; only so much as would make a play his,
only what was really essential to make it different from anyone elses.
When there is this economy of effort it is possible to have several,
even many, good poets at once. The great ages did not perhaps _produce_
much more talent than ours; but less talent was wasted.

Now in a formless age there is very little hope for the minor poet to do
anything worth doing; and when I say minor I mean very good poets
indeed: such as filled the Greek anthology and the Elizabethan
song-books; even a Herrick; but not merely second-rate poets, for Denham
and Waller have quite another importance, occupying points in the
development of a major form. When everything is set out for the minor
poet to do, he may quite frequently come upon some _trouvaille_, even in
the drama: Peele and Brome are examples. Under the present conditions,
the minor poet has too much to do. And this leads to another reason for
the incompetence of our time in poetic drama.

Permanent literature is always a presentation: either a presentation of
thought, or a presentation of feeling by a statement of events in human
action or objects in the external world. In earlier literatureto avoid
the word classicwe find both kinds, and sometimes, as in some of the
dialogues of Plato, exquisite combinations of both. Aristotle presents
thought, stripped to the essential structure, and he is a great
_writer_. The _Agamemnon_ or _Macbeth_ is equally a statement, but of
events. They are as much works of the intellect as the writings of
Aristotle. There are more recent works of art which have the same
quality of intellect in common with those of schylus and Shakespeare
and Aristotle: _Education Sentimentale_ is one of them. Compare it with
such a book as _Vanity Fair_ and you will see that the labour of the
intellect consisted largely in a purification, in keeping out a great
deal that Thackeray allowed to remain in; in refraining from reflection,
in putting into the statement enough to make reflection unnecessary. The
case of Plato is still more illuminating. Take the _Thetetus_. In a few
opening words Plato gives a scene, a personality, a feeling, which
colour the subsequent discourse but do not interfere with it: the
particular setting, and the abstruse theory of knowledge afterwards
developed, co-operate without confusion. Could any contemporary author
exhibit such control?

In the nineteenth century another mentality manifested itself It is
evident in a very able and brilliant poem, Goethes _Faust_. Marlowes
Mephistopheles is a simpler creature than Goethes. But at least Marlowe
has, in a few words, concentrated him into a statement. He is there, and
(incidentally) he renders Miltons Satan superfluous. Goethes demon
inevitably sends us back to Goethe. He embodies a philosophy. A creation
of art should not do that: he should _replace_ the philosophy. Goethe
has not, that is to say, sacrificed or consecrated his thought to make
the drama; the drama is still a means. And this type of mixed art has
been repeated by men incomparably smaller than Goethe. We have had one
other remarkable work of this type: _Peer Gynt_. And we have had the
plays of M. Maeterlinck and M. Claudel.[5]

Footnote 5:

  I should except _The Dynasts_. This gigantic panorama is hardly to be
  called a success, but it is essentially an attempt to present a
  vision, and sacrifices the philosophy to the vision, as all great
  dramas do. Mr. Hardy has apprehended his matter as a poet and an
  artist.

In the work of Maeterlinck and Claudel on the one hand, and those of M.
Bergson on the other, we have the mixture of the genres in which our age
delights. Every work of imagination must have a philosophy; and every
philosophy must be a work of arthow often have we heard that M. Bergson
is an artist! It is a boast of his disciples. It is what the word art
means to them that is the disputable point. Certain works of philosophy
can be called works of art: much of Aristotle and Plato, Spinoza, parts
of Hume, Mr. Bradleys _Principles of Logic_, Mr. Russells essay on
Denoting: clear and beautifully formed thought. But this is not what
the admirers of Bergson, Claudel, or Maeterlinck (the philosophy of the
latter is a little out of date) mean. They mean precisely what is not
clear, but what is an emotional stimulus. And as a mixture of thought
and of vision provides more stimulus, by suggesting both, both clear
thinking and clear statement of particular objects must disappear.

The undigested idea or philosophy, the idea-emotion, is to be found
also in poetic dramas which are conscientious attempts to adapt a true
structure, Athenian or Elizabethan, to contemporary feeling. It appears
sometimes as the attempt to supply the defect of structure by an
internal structure. But most important of all is the structure of the
incidents. For Tragedy is an imitation, not of men, but of an action and
of life, and life consists in action, and its end is a mode of action,
not a quality.[6]

Footnote 6:

  _Poetics_, vi. 9. Butchers translation.

We have on the one hand the poetic drama, imitation Greek, imitation
Elizabethan, or modern-philosophical, on the other the comedy of
ideas, from Shaw to Galsworthy, down to the ordinary social comedy.
The most ramshackle Guitry farce has some paltry idea or comment upon
life put into the mouth of one of the characters at the end. It is said
that the stage can be used for a variety of purposes, that in only one
of them perhaps is it united with literary art. A mute theatre is a
possibility (I do not mean the cinema); the ballet is an actuality
(though under-nourished); opera is an institution; but where you have
imitations of life on the stage, with speech, the only standard that
we can allow is the standard of the work of art, aiming at the same
intensity at which poetry and the other forms of art aim. From that
point of view the Shavian drama is a hybrid as the Maeterlinckian drama
is, and we need express no surprise at their belonging to the same
epoch. Both philosophies are popularizations: the moment an idea has
been transferred from its pure state in order that it may become
comprehensible to the inferior intelligence it has lost contact with
art. It can remain pure only by being stated simply in the form of
general truth, or by being transmuted, as the attitude of Flaubert
toward the small bourgeois is transformed in _Education Sentimentale_.
It has there become so identified with the reality that you can no
longer say what the idea is.

The essential is not, of course, that drama should be written in verse,
or that we should be able to extenuate our appreciation of broad farce
by occasionally attending a performance of a play of Euripides where
Professor Murrays translation is sold at the door. The essential is to
get upon the stage this precise statement of life which is at the same
time a point of view, a worlda world which the authors mind has
subjected to a complete process of simplification. I do not find that
any drama which embodies a philosophy of the authors (like _Faust_)
or which illustrates any social theory (like Shaws) can possibly fulfil
the requirementsthough a place might be left for Shaw if not for
Goethe. And the world of Ibsen and the world of Tchehov are not enough
simplified, universal.

Finally, we must take into account the instability of any artthe drama,
music, dancingwhich depends upon representation by performers. The
intervention of performers introduces a complication of economic
conditions which is in itself likely to be injurious. A struggle, more
or less unconscious, between the creator and the interpreter is almost
inevitable. The interest of a performer is almost certain to be centred
in himself: a very slight acquaintance with actors and musicians will
testify. The performer is interested not in form but in opportunities
for virtuosity or in the communication of his personality; the
formlessness, the lack of intellectual clarity and distinction in modern
music, the great physical stamina and physical training which it often
requires, are perhaps signs of the triumph of the performer. The
consummation of the triumph of the actor over the play is perhaps the
productions of the Guitry.

The conflict is one which certainly cannot be terminated by the utter
rout of the actor profession. For one thing, the stage appeals to too
many demands besides the demand for art for that to be possible; and
also we need, unfortunately, something more than refined automatons.
Occasionally attempts have been made to get around the actor, to
envelop him in masks, to set up a few conventions for him to stumble
over, or even to develop little breeds of actors for some special Art
drama. This meddling with nature seldom succeeds; nature usually
overcomes these obstacles. Possibly the majority of attempts to confect
a poetic drama have begun at the wrong end; they have aimed at the small
public which wants poetry. (Novices, says Aristotle, in the art
attain to finish of diction and precision of portraiture before they can
construct the plot.) The Elizabethan drama was aimed at a public which
wanted _entertainment_ of a crude sort, but would _stand_ a good deal of
poetry; our problem should be to take a form of entertainment, and
subject it to the process which would leave it a form of art. Perhaps
the music-hall comedian is the best material. I am aware that this is a
dangerous suggestion to make. For every person who is likely to consider
it seriously there are a dozen toymakers who would leap to tickle
sthetic society into one more quiver and giggle of art debauch. Very
few treat art seriously. There are those who treat it solemnly, and will
continue to write poetic pastiches of Euripides and Shakespeare; and
there are others who treat it as a joke.




                     Euripides and Professor Murray


The recent appearance of Miss Sybil Thorndyke as Medea at the Holborn
Empire is an event which has a bearing upon three subjects of
considerable interest: the drama, the present standing of Greek
literature, and the importance of good contemporary translation. On the
occasion on which I was present the performance was certainly a success;
the audience was large, it was attentive, and its applause was long.
Whether the success was due to Euripides is uncertain; whether it was
due to Professor Murray is not proved; but that it was in considerable
measure due to Miss Thorndyke there is no doubt. To have held the centre
of the stage for two hours in a rle which requires both extreme
violence and restraint, a rle which requires simple force and subtle
variation; to have sustained so difficult a rle almost without support;
this was a legitimate success. The audience, or what could be seen of it
from one of the cheaper seats, was serious and respectful and perhaps
inclined to self-approval at having attended the performance of a Greek
play; but Miss Thorndykes acting might have held almost any audience.
It employed all the conventions, the theatricalities, of the modern
stage; yet her personality triumphed over not only Professor Murrays
verse but her own training.

The question remains whether the production was a work of art. The
rest of the cast appeared slightly ill at ease; the nurse was quite a
tolerable nurse of the crone type; Jason was negative; the messenger was
uncomfortable at having to make such a long speech; and the refined
Dalcroze chorus had mellifluous voices which rendered their lyrics
happily inaudible. All this contributed toward the high-brow effect
which is so depressing; and we imagine that the actors of Athens, who
had to speak clearly enough for 20,000 auditors to be able to criticize
the versification, would have been pelted with figs and olives had they
mumbled so unintelligibly as most of this troupe. But the Greek actor
spoke in his own language, and our actors were forced to speak in the
language of Professor Gilbert Murray. So that on the whole we may say
that the performance was an interesting one.

I do not believe, however, that such performances will do very much to
rehabilitate Greek literature or our own, unless they stimulate a desire
for better translations. The serious auditors, many of whom I observed
to be like myself provided with Professor Murrays eighteenpenny
translation, were probably not aware that Miss Thorndyke, in order to
succeed as well as she did, was really engaged in a struggle against the
translators verse. She triumphed over it by attracting our attention to
her expression and tone and making us neglect her words; and this, of
course, was not the dramatic method of Greek acting at its best. The
English and Greek languages remained where they were. But few persons
realize that the Greek language and the Latin language, and,
_therefore_, we say, the English language, are within our lifetime
passing through a critical period. The Classics have, during the latter
part of the nineteenth century and up to the present moment, lost their
place as a pillar of the social and political systemsuch as the
Established Church still is. If they are to survive, to justify
themselves as literature, as an element in the European mind, as the
foundation for the literature we hope to create, they are very badly in
need of persons capable of expounding them. We need some onenot a
member of the Church of Rome, and perhaps preferably not a member of the
Church of Englandto explain how vital a matter it is, if Aristotle may
be said to have been a moral pilot of Europe, whether we shall or shall
not drop that pilot. And we need a number of educated poets who shall at
least have opinions about Greek drama, and whether it is or is not of
any use to us. And it must be said that Professor Gilbert Murray is not
the man for this. Greek poetry will never have the slightest vitalizing
effect upon English poetry if it can only appear masquerading as a
vulgar debasement of the eminently personal idiom of Swinburne. These
are strong words to use against the most popular Hellenist of his time;
but we must witness of Professor Murray ere we die that these things are
not otherwise but thus.

This is really a point of capital importance. That the most conspicuous
Greek propagandist of the day should almost habitually use two words
where the Greek language requires one, and where the English language
will provide him with one; that he should render  by _grey_
shadow; and that he should stretch the Greek brevity to fit the loose
frame of William Morris, and blur the Greek lyric to the fluid haze of
Swinburne; these are not faults of infinitesimal insignificance. The
first great speech of Medea Mr. Murray begins with:

    Women of Corinth, I am come to show
    My face, lest ye despise me....

We find in the Greek,  . Show my face, therefore, is Mr.
Murrays gift.

    This thing undreamed of, sudden from on high,
    Hath sapped my soul: I dazzle where I stand,
    The cup of all life shattered in my hand....

Again, we find that the Greek is:

         
         
       , .

So, here are two striking phrases which we owe to Mr. Murray; it is he
who has sapped our soul and shattered the cup of all life for Euripides.
And these are only random examples.

        

becomes no bloodier spirit between heaven and hell! Surely we know
that Professor Murray is acquainted with Sister Helen? Professor
Murray has simply interposed between Euripides and ourselves a barrier
more impenetrable than the Greek language. We do not reproach him for
preferring, apparently, Euripides to schylus. But if he does, he should
at least appreciate Euripides. And it is inconceivable that anyone with
a genuine feeling for the sound of Greek verse should deliberately elect
the William Morris couplet, the Swinburne lyric, as a just equivalent.

As a poet, Mr. Murray is merely a very insignificant follower of the
pre-Raphaelite movement. As a Hellenist, he is very much of the present
day, and a very important figure in the day. This day began, in a sense,
with Tylor and a few German anthropologists; since then we have acquired
sociology and social psychology, we have watched the clinics of Ribot
and Janet, we have read books from Vienna and heard a discourse of
Bergson; a philosophy arose at Cambridge; social emancipation crawled
abroad; our historical knowledge has of course increased; and we have a
curious Freudian-social-mystical-rationalistic-higher-critical
interpretation of the Classics and what used to be called the
Scriptures. I do not deny the very great value of all work by scientists
in their own departments, the great interest also of this work in detail
and in its consequences. Few books are more fascinating than those of
Miss Harrison, Mr. Cornford, or Mr. Cooke, when they burrow in the
origins of Greek myths and rites; M. Durkheim, with his social
consciousness, and M. Levy-Bruhl, with his Bororo Indians who convince
themselves that they are parroquets, are delightful writers. A number of
sciences have sprung up in an almost tropical exuberance which
undoubtedly excites our admiration, and the garden, not unnaturally, has
come to resemble a jungle. Such men as Tylor, and Robertson Smith, and
Wilhelm Wundt, who early fertilized the soil, would hardly recognize the
resulting vegetation; and indeed poor Wundts _Vlkerpsychologie_ was a
musty relic before it was translated.

All these events are useful and important in their phase, and they have
sensibly affected our attitude towards the Classics; and it is this
phase of classical study that Professor Murraythe friend and inspirer
of Miss Jane Harrisonrepresents. The Greek is no longer the
awe-inspiring Belvedere of Winckelmann, Goethe, and Schopenhauer, the
figure of which Walter Pater and Oscar Wilde offered us a slightly
debased re-edition. And we realize better how differentnot how much
more Olympianwere the conditions of the Greek civilization from ours;
and at the same time Mr. Zimmern has shown us how the Greek dealt with
analogous problems. Incidentally we do not believe that a good English
prose style can be modelled upon Cicero, or Tacitus, or Thucydides. If
Pindar bores us, we admit it; we are not certain that Sappho was _very_
much greater than Catullus; we hold various opinions about Vergil; and
we think more highly of Petronius than our grandfathers did.

It is to be hoped that we may be grateful to Professor Murray and his
friends for what they have done, while we endeavour to neutralize
Professor Murrays influence upon Greek literature and English language
in his translations by making better translations. The choruses from
Euripides by H. D. are, allowing for errors and even occasional
omissions of difficult passages, much nearer to both Greek and English
than Mr. Murrays. But H. D. and the other poets of the Poets
Translation Series have so far done no more than pick up some of the
more romantic crumbs of Greek literature; none of them has yet shown
himself competent to attack the _Agamemnon_. If we are to digest the
heavy food of historical and scientific knowledge that we have eaten we
must be prepared for much greater exertions. We need a digestion which
can assimilate both Homer and Flaubert. We need a careful study of
Renaissance Humanists and Translators, such as Mr. Pound has begun. We
need an eye which can see the past in its place with its definite
differences from the present, and yet so lively that it shall be as
present to us as the present. This is the creative eye; and it is
because Professor Murray has no creative instinct that he leaves
Euripides quite dead.




                      Rhetoric and Poetic Drama


The death of Rostand is the disappearance of the poet whom, more than
any other in France, we treated as the exponent of rhetoric, thinking
of rhetoric as something recently out of fashion. And as we find
ourselves looking back rather tenderly upon the author of _Cyrano_ we
wonder what this vice or quality is that is associated as plainly with
Rostands merits as with his defects. His rhetoric, at least, suited him
at times so well, and so much better than it suited a much greater poet,
Baudelaire, who is at times as rhetorical as Rostand. And we begin to
suspect that the word is merely a vague term of abuse for any style that
is bad, that is so evidently bad or second-rate that we do not recognize
the necessity for greater precision in the phrases we apply to it.

Our own Elizabethan and Jacobean poetryin so nice a problem it is much
safer to stick to ones own languageis repeatedly called rhetorical.
It had this and that notable quality, but, when we wish to admit that it
had defects, it is rhetorical. It had serious defects, even gross
faults, but we cannot be considered to have erased them from our
language when we are so unclear in our perception of what they are. The
fact is that both Elizabethan prose and Elizabethan poetry are written
in a variety of styles with a variety of vices. Is the style of Lyly, is
Euphuism, rhetorical? In contrast to the elder style of Ascham and Elyot
which it assaults, it is a clear, flowing, orderly and relatively pure
style, with a systematic if monotonous formula of antitheses and
similes. Is the style of Nashe? A tumid, flatulent, vigorous style very
different from Lylys. Or it is perhaps the strained and the mixed
figures of speech in which Shakespeare indulged himself. Or it is
perhaps the careful declamation of Jonson. The word simply cannot be
used as synonymous with bad writing. The meanings which it has been
obliged to shoulder have been mostly opprobrious; but if a precise
meaning can be found for it this meaning may occasionally represent a
virtue. It is one of those words which it is the business of criticism
to dissect and reassemble. Let us avoid the assumption that rhetoric is
a vice of manner, and endeavour to find a rhetoric of substance also,
which is right because it issues from what it has to express.

At the present time there is a manifest preference for the
conversational in poetrythe style of direct speech, opposed to the
oratorical and the rhetorical; but if rhetoric is any convention of
writing inappropriately applied, this conversational style can and does
become a rhetoricor what is supposed to be a conversational style, for
it is often as remote from polite discourse as well could be. Much of
the second and third rate in American _vers libre_ is of this sort; and
much of the second and third rate in English Wordsworthianism. There is
in fact no conversational or other form which can be applied
indiscriminately; if a writer wishes to give the effect of speech he
must positively give the effect of himself talking in his own person or
in one of his rles; and if we are to express ourselves, our variety of
thoughts and feelings, on a variety of subjects with inevitable
rightness, we must adapt our manner to the moment with infinite
variations. Examination of the development of Elizabethan drama shows
this progress in adaptation, a development from monotony to variety, a
progressive refinement in the perception of the variations of feeling,
and a progressive elaboration of the means of expressing these
variations. This drama is admitted to have grown away from the
rhetorical expression, the bombast speeches, of Kyd and Marlowe to the
subtle and dispersed utterance of Shakespeare and Webster. But this
apparent abandonment or outgrowth of rhetoric is two things: it is
partly an improvement in language and it is partly progressive variation
in feeling. There is, of course, a long distance separating the furibund
fluency of old Hieronimo and the broken words of Lear. There is also a
difference between the famous

    Oh eyes no eyes, but fountains full of tears!
    Oh life no life, but lively form of death!

and the superb additions to Hieronimo.[7]

Footnote 7:

  Of the authorship it can only be said that the lines are by some
  admirer of Marlowe. This might well be Jonson.

We think of Shakespeare perhaps as the dramatist who concentrates
everything into a sentence, Pray you undo this button, or Honest
honest Iago; we forget that there is a rhetoric proper to Shakespeare
at his best period which is quite free from the genuine Shakespearean
vices either of the early period or the late. These passages are
comparable to the best bombast of Kyd or Marlowe, with a greater command
of language and a greater control of the emotion. _The Spanish Tragedy_
is bombastic when it descends to language which was only the trick of
its age; _Tamburlaine_ is bombastic because it is monotonous, inflexible
to the alterations of emotion. The really fine rhetoric of Shakespeare
occurs in situations where a character in the play _sees himself_ in a
dramatic light:

    _Othello._    And say, besides,that in Aleppo once....

    _Coriolanus._ If you have writ your annals true, tis there,
                  That like an eagle in a dovecote, I
                  Fluttered your Volscians in Corioli.
                  Alone I did it. Boy!

    _Timon._      Come not to me again; but say to Athens,
                  Timon hath made his everlasting mansion
                  Upon the beachd verge of the salt flood....

It occurs also once in _Antony and Cleopatra_, when Enobarbus is
inspired to see Cleopatra in this dramatic light:

    The barge she sat in....

Shakespeare made fun of Marston, and Jonson made fun of Kyd. But in
Marstons play the words were expressive of nothing; and Jonson was
criticizing the feeble and conceited language, not the emotion, not the
oratory. Jonson is as oratorical himself, and the moments when his
oratory succeeds are, I believe, the moments that conform to our
formula. Notably the speech of Syllas ghost in the induction to
_Catiline_, and the speech of Envy at the beginning of _The Poetaster_.
These two figures are contemplating their own dramatic importance, and
quite properly. But in the Senate speeches in _Catiline_, how tedious,
how dusty! Here we are spectators not of a play of characters, but of a
play of forensic, exactly as if we had been forced to attend the sitting
itself. A speech in a play should never appear to be intended to move us
as it might conceivably move other characters in the play, for it is
essential that we should preserve our position of spectators, and
observe always from the outside though with complete understanding. The
scene in _Julius Csar_ is right because the object of our attention is
not the speech of Antony (_Bedeutung_) but the effect of his speech upon
the mob, and Antonys intention, his preparation and consciousness of
the effect. And in the rhetorical speeches from Shakespeare which have
been cited, we have this necessary advantage of a new clue to the
character, in noting the angle from which he views himself. But when a
character _in_ a play makes a direct appeal to us, we are either the
victims of our own sentiment, or we are in the presence of a vicious
rhetoric.

These references ought to supply some evidence of the propriety of
Cyrano on Noses. Is not Cyrano exactly in this position of contemplating
himself as a romantic, a dramatic figure? This dramatic sense on the
part of the characters themselves is rare in modern drama. In
sentimental drama it appears in a degraded form, when we are evidently
intended to accept the characters sentimental interpretation of
himself. In plays of realism we often find parts which are never allowed
to be consciously dramatic, for fear, perhaps, of their appearing less
real. But in actual life, in many of those situations in actual life
which we enjoy consciously and keenly, we are at times aware of
ourselves in this way, and these moments are of very great usefulness to
dramatic verse. A very small part of acting is that which takes place on
the stage! Rostand hadwhether he had anything else or notthis dramatic
sense, and it is what gives life to Cyrano. It is a sense which is
almost a sense of humour (for when anyone is conscious of himself as
acting, something like a sense of humour is present). It gives Rostands
charactersCyrano at leasta gusto which is uncommon on the modern
stage. No doubt Rostands people play up to this too steadily. We
recognize that in the love scenes of Cyrano in the garden, for in _Romeo
and Juliet_ the profounder dramatist shows his lovers melting into
incoherent unconsciousness of their isolated selves, shows the human
soul in the process of forgetting itself. Rostand could not do that; but
in the particular case of Cyrano on Noses, the character, the situation,
the occasion were perfectly suited and combined. The tirade generated by
this combination is not only genuinely and highly dramatic: it is
possibly poetry also. If a writer is incapable of composing such a scene
as this, so much the worse for his poetic drama.

_Cyrano_ satisfies, as far as scenes like this can satisfy, the
requirements of poetic drama. It must take genuine and substantial human
emotions, such emotions as observation can confirm, typical emotions,
and give them artistic form; the degree of abstraction is a question for
the method of each author. In Shakespeare the form is determined in the
unity of the whole, as well as single scenes; it is something to attain
this unity, as Rostand does, in scenes if not the whole play. Not only
as a dramatist, but as a poet, he is superior to Maeterlinck, whose
drama, in failing to be dramatic, fails also to be poetic. Maeterlinck
has a literary perception of the dramatic and a literary perception of
the poetic, and he joins the two; the two are not, as sometimes they are
in the work of Rostand, fused. His characters take no conscious delight
in their rlethey are sentimental. With Rostand the centre of gravity
is in the expression of the emotion, not as with Maeterlinck in the
emotion which cannot be expressed. Some writers appear to believe that
emotions gain in intensity through being inarticulate. Perhaps the
emotions are not significant enough to endure full daylight.

In any case, we may take our choice: we may apply the term rhetoric to
the type of dramatic speech which I have instanced, and then we must
admit that it covers good as well as bad. Or we may choose to except
this type of speech from rhetoric. In that case we must say that
rhetoric is any adornment or inflation of speech which is _not done for
a particular effect_ but for a general impressiveness. And in this case,
too, we cannot allow the term to cover all bad writing.




          Some Notes on the Blank Verse of Christopher Marlowe


    Marloe was stabd with a dagger, and dyed swearing

A more friendly critic, Mr. A. C. Swinburne, observes of this poet that
the father of English tragedy and the creator of English blank verse
was therefore also the teacher and the guide of Shakespeare. In this
sentence there are two misleading assumptions and two misleading
conclusions. Kyd has as good a title to the first honour as Marlowe;
Surrey has a better title to the second; and Shakespeare was not taught
or guided by one of his predecessors or contemporaries alone. The less
questionable judgment is, that Marlowe exercised a strong influence over
later drama, though not himself as great a dramatist as Kyd; that he
introduced several new tones into blank verse, and commenced the
dissociative process which drew it farther and farther away from the
rhythms of rhymed verse; and that when Shakespeare borrowed from him,
which was pretty often at the beginning, Shakespeare either made
something inferior or something different.

The comparative study of English versification at various periods is a
large tract of unwritten history. To make a study of blank verse alone,
would be to elicit some curious conclusions. It would show, I believe,
that blank verse within Shakespeares lifetime was more highly
developed, that it became the vehicle of more varied and more intense
art-emotions than it has ever conveyed since; and that after the
erection of the Chinese Wall of Milton, blank verse has suffered not
only arrest but retrogression. That the blank verse of Tennyson, for
example, a consummate master of this form in certain applications, is
cruder (_not_ rougher or less perfect in technique) than that of half
a dozen contemporaries of Shakespeare; cruder, because less capable of
expressing complicated, subtle, and surprising emotions.

Every writer who has written any blank verse worth saving has produced
particular tones which his verse and no others is capable of rendering;
and we should keep this in mind when we talk about influences and
indebtedness. Shakespeare is universal (if you like) because he has
more of these tones than anyone else; but they are all out of the one
man; one man cannot be more than one man; there might have been six
Shakespeares at once without conflicting frontiers; and to say that
Shakespeare expressed nearly all human emotions, implying that he left
very little for anyone else, is a radical misunderstanding of art and
the artista misunderstanding which, even when explicitly rejected, may
lead to our neglecting the effort of attention necessary to discover the
specific properties of the verse of Shakespeares contemporaries. The
development of blank verse may be likened to the analysis of that
astonishing industrial product coal-tar. Marlowes verse is one of the
earlier derivatives, but it possesses properties which are not repeated
in any of the analytic or synthetic blank verses discovered somewhat
later.

The vices of style of Marlowes and Shakespeares age is a convenient
name for a number of vices, no one of which, perhaps, was shared by all
of the writers. It is pertinent, at least, to remark that Marlowes
rhetoric is not, or not characteristically, Shakespeares rhetoric;
that Marlowes rhetoric consists in a pretty simple huffe-snuffe
bombast, while Shakespeares is more exactly a vice of style, a tortured
perverse ingenuity of images which dissipates instead of concentrating
the imagination, and which may be due in part to influences by which
Marlowe was untouched. Next, we find that Marlowes vice is one which he
was gradually attenuating, and even, what is more miraculous, turning
into a virtue. And we find that this bard of torrential imagination
recognized many of his best bits (and those of one or two others), saved
them, and reproduced them more than once, almost invariably improving
them in the process.

It is worth while noticing a few of these versions, because they
indicate, somewhat contrary to usual opinion, that Marlowe was a
deliberate and conscious workman. Mr. J. G. Robertson has spotted an
interesting theft of Marlowes from Spenser. Here is Spenser (_Faery
Queen_, I. vii. 32):

    Like to an almond tree y-mounted high
      On top of green Selinis all alone,
    With blossoms brave bedeckd daintily;
      Whose tender locks do tremble every one
    At every little breath that under heaven is blown.

And here Marlowe (_Tamburlaine_, Part II. Act IV. sc. iii.):

    Like to an almond tree y-mounted high
    Upon the lofty and celestial mount
    Of evergreen Selinus, quaintly deckd
    With blooms more white than Erycinas brows,
    Whose tender blossoms tremble every one
    At every little breath that thorough heaven is blown.

This is interesting, not only as showing that Marlowes talent, like
that of most poets, was partly synthetic, but also because it seems to
give a clue to some particularly lyric effects found in _Tamburlaine_,
not in Marlowes other plays, and not, I believe, anywhere else. For
example, the praise of Zenocrate in Part II. Act. II. sc. iv.:

    Now walk the angels on the walls of heaven,
    As sentinels to warn th immortal souls
    To entertain divine Zenocrate: etc.

This is not Spensers movement, but the influence of Spenser must be
present. There had been no great blank verse before Marlowe; but there
was the powerful presence of this great master of melody immediately
precedent; and the combination produced results which could not be
repeated. I do not think that it can be claimed that Peele had any
influence here.

The passage quoted from Spenser has a further interest. It will be noted
that the fourth line:

    With blooms more white than Erycinas brows

is Marlowes contribution. Compare this with these other lines of
Marlowe:

    So looks my love, shadowing in her brows

    (_Tamburlaine_)

    Like to the shadows of Pyramides

    (_Tamburlaine_)

and the final and best version:

    Shadowing more beauty in their airy brows
    Than have the white breasts of the queen of love.

    (_Doctor Faustus_)

and compare the whole set with Spenser again (_F. Q._):

    Upon her eyelids many graces sate
    Under the shadow of her even brows,

a passage which Mr. Robertson says Spenser himself used in three other
places.

This economy is frequent in Marlowe. Within _Tamburlaine_ it occurs in
the form of monotony, especially in the facile use of resonant names
(_e.g._ the recurrence of Caspia or Caspian with the same tone
effect), a practice in which Marlowe was followed by Milton, but which
Marlowe himself outgrew. Again,

    Zenocrate, lovlier than the love of Jove,
    Brighter than is the silver Rhodope,

is paralleled later by

    Zenocrate, the lovliest maid alive,
    Fairer than rocks of pearl and precious stone.

One line Marlowe remodels with triumphant success:

    And set black streamers in the firmament

    (_Tamburlaine_)

becomes

    See, see, where Christs blood streams in the firmament!

    (_Doctor Faustus_)

The verse accomplishments of _Tamburlaine_ are notably two: Marlowe gets
into blank verse the melody of Spenser, and he gets a new driving power
by reinforcing the sentence period against the line period. The rapid
long sentence, running line into line, as in the famous soliloquies
Nature compounded of four elements and What is beauty, saith my
sufferings, then? marks the certain escape of blank verse from the
rhymed couplet, and from the elegiac or rather pastoral note of Surrey,
to which Tennyson returned. If you contrast these two soliloquies with
the verse of Marlowes greatest contemporary, Kydby no means a
despicable versifieryou see the importance of the innovation:

    The one took sanctuary, and, being sent for out,
    Was murdered in Southwark as he passed
    To Greenwich, where the Lord Protector lay.
    Black Will was burned in Flushing on a stage;
    Green was hanged at Osbridge in Kent....

which is not really inferior to:

                      So these four abode
    Within one house together; and as years
    Went forward, Mary took another mate;
    But Dora lived unmarried till her death.

    (Tennyson, _Dora_)

In _Faustus_ Marlowe went farther: he broke up the line, to a gain in
intensity, in the last soliloquy; and he developed a new and important
conversational tone in the dialogues of Faustus with the devil. _Edward
II._ has never lacked consideration: it is more desirable, in brief
space, to remark upon two plays, one of which has been misunderstood and
the other underrated. These are the _Jew of Malta_ and _Dido Queen of
Carthage_. Of the first of these, it has always been said that the end,
even the last two acts, are unworthy of the first three. If one takes
the _Jew of Malta_ not as a tragedy, or as a tragedy of blood, but as
a farce, the concluding act becomes intelligible; and if we attend with
a careful ear to the versification, we find that Marlowe develops a tone
to suit this farce, and even perhaps that this tone is his most powerful
and mature tone. I say farce, but with the enfeebled humour of our times
the word is a misnomer; it is the farce of the old English humour, the
terribly serious, even savage comic humour, the humour which spent its
last breath on the decadent genius of Dickens. It has nothing in common
with J. M. Barrie, Captain Bairnsfather, or _Punch_. It is the humour of
that very serious (but very different) play, _Volpone_.

    First, be thou void of these affections,
    Compassion, love, vain hope, and heartless fear;
    Be moved at nothing, see thou pity none ...
    As for myself, I walk abroad o nights,
    And kill sick people groaning under walls:
    Sometimes I go about and poison wells ...

and the last words of Barabas complete this prodigious caricature:

    But now begins th extremity of heat
    To pinch me with intolerable pangs:
    Die, life! fly, soul! tongue, curse thy fill, and die!

It is something which Shakespeare could not do, and which he could not
have understood.

_Dido_ appears to be a hurried play, perhaps done to order with the
_neid_ in front of him. But even here there is progress. The account of
the sack of Troy is in this newer style of Marlowes, this style which
secures its emphasis by always hesitating on the edge of caricature at
the right moment:

    The Grecian soldiers, tird with ten years war,
    Began to cry, Let us unto our ships,
    Troy is invincible, why stay we here?...

    By this, the camp was come unto the walls,
    And through the breach did march into the streets,
    Where, meeting with the rest, Kill, kill! they cried....

    And after him, his band of Myrmidons,
    With balls of wild-fire in their murdering paws ...

    At last, the soldiers pulld her by the heels,
    And swung her howling in the empty air....

    We saw Cassandra sprawling in the streets ...

This is not Vergil, or Shakespeare; it is pure Marlowe. By comparing the
whole speech with Clarences dream, in _Richard III._, one acquires a
little insight into the difference between Marlowe and Shakespeare:

                         What scourge for perjury
    Can this dark monarchy afford false Clarence?

There, on the other hand, is what Marlowes style could not do; the
phrase has a concision which is almost classical, certainly Dantesque.
Again, as often with the Elizabethan dramatists, there are lines in
Marlowe, besides the many lines that Shakespeare adapted, that might
have been written by either:

                              If thou wilt stay,
    Leap in mine arms; mine arms are open wide;
    If not, turn from me, and Ill turn from thee;
    For though thou hast the heart to say farewell,
    I have not power to stay thee.

But the direction in which Marlowes verse might have moved, had he not
dyed swearing, is quite un-Shakespearean, is toward this intense and
serious and indubitably great poetry, which, like some great painting
and sculpture, attains its effects by something not unlike caricature.




                        Hamlet and His Problems


Few critics have even admitted that _Hamlet_ the play is the primary
problem, and Hamlet the character only secondary. And Hamlet the
character has had an especial temptation for that most dangerous type of
critic: the critic with a mind which is naturally of the creative order,
but which through some weakness in creative power exercises itself in
criticism instead. These minds often find in Hamlet a vicarious
existence for their own artistic realization. Such a mind had Goethe,
who made of Hamlet a Werther; and such had Coleridge, who made of Hamlet
a Coleridge; and probably neither of these men in writing about Hamlet
remembered that his first business was to study a work of art. The kind
of criticism that Goethe and Coleridge produced, in writing of Hamlet,
is the most misleading kind possible. For they both possessed
unquestionable critical insight, and both make their critical
aberrations the more plausible by the substitutionof their own Hamlet
for Shakespeareswhich their creative gift effects. We should be
thankful that Walter Pater did not fix his attention on this play.

Two recent writers, Mr. J. M. Robertson and Professor Stoll of the
University of Minnesota, have issued small books which can be praised
for moving in the other direction. Mr. Stoll performs a service in
recalling to our attention the labours of the critics of the seventeenth
and eighteenth centuries,[8] observing that

Footnote 8:

  I have never, by the way, seen a cogent refutation of Thomas Rymers
  objections to _Othello_.

    they knew less about psychology than more recent Hamlet critics, but
    they were nearer in spirit to Shakespeares art; and as they
    insisted on the importance of the effect of the whole rather than on
    the importance of the leading character, they were nearer, in their
    old-fashioned way, to the secret of dramatic art in general.

_Qua_ work of art, the work of art cannot be interpreted; there is
nothing to interpret; we can only criticize it according to standards,
in comparison to other works of art; and for interpretation the chief
task is the presentation of relevant historical facts which the reader
is not assumed to know. Mr. Robertson points out, very pertinently, how
critics have failed in their interpretation of _Hamlet_ by ignoring
what ought to be very obvious: that _Hamlet_ is a stratification, that
it represents the efforts of a series of men, each making what he could
out of the work of his predecessors. The _Hamlet_ of Shakespeare will
appear to us very differently if, instead of treating the whole action
of the play as due to Shakespeares design, we perceive his _Hamlet_ to
be superposed upon much cruder material which persists even in the final
form.

We know that there was an older play by Thomas Kyd, that extraordinary
dramatic (if not poetic) genius who was in all probability the author of
two plays so dissimilar as the _Spanish Tragedy_ and _Arden of
Feversham_; and what this play was like we can guess from three clues:
from the _Spanish Tragedy_ itself, from the tale of Belleforest upon
which Kyds _Hamlet_ must have been based, and from a version acted in
Germany in Shakespeares lifetime which bears strong evidence of having
been adapted from the earlier, not from the later, play. From these
three sources it is clear that in the earlier play the motive was a
revenge-motive simply; that the action or delay is caused, as in the
_Spanish Tragedy_, solely by the difficulty of assassinating a monarch
surrounded by guards; and that the madness of Hamlet was feigned in
order to escape suspicion, and successfully. In the final play of
Shakespeare, on the other hand, there is a motive which is more
important than that of revenge, and which explicitly blunts the
latter; the delay in revenge is unexplained on grounds of necessity or
expediency; and the effect of the madness is not to lull but to arouse
the kings suspicion. The alteration is not complete enough, however, to
be convincing. Furthermore, there are verbal parallels so close to the
_Spanish Tragedy_ as to leave no doubt that in places Shakespeare was
merely _revising_ the text of Kyd. And finally there are unexplained
scenesthe Polonius-Laertes and the Polonius-Reynaldo scenesfor which
there is little excuse; these scenes are not in the verse style of Kyd,
and not beyond doubt in the style of Shakespeare. These Mr. Robertson
believes to be scenes in the original play of Kyd reworked by a third
hand, perhaps Chapman, before Shakespeare touched the play. And he
concludes, with very strong show of reason, that the original play of
Kyd was, like certain other revenge plays, in two parts of five acts
each. The upshot of Mr. Robertsons examination is, we believe,
irrefragable: that Shakespeares _Hamlet_, so far as it is
Shakespeares, is a play dealing with the effect of a mothers guilt
upon her son, and that Shakespeare was unable to impose this motive
successfully upon the intractable material of the old play.

Of the intractability there can be no doubt. So far from being
Shakespeares masterpiece, the play is most certainly an artistic
failure. In several ways the play is puzzling, and disquieting as is
none of the others. Of all the plays it is the longest and is possibly
the one on which Shakespeare spent most pains; and yet he has left in it
superfluous and inconsistent scenes which even hasty revision should
have noticed. The versification is variable. Lines like

      Look, the morn, in russet mantle clad,
    Walks oer the dew of yon high eastern hill,

are of the Shakespeare of _Romeo and Juliet_. The lines in Act V. sc.
ii.,

    Sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting
    That would not let me sleep ...
    Up from my cabin,
    My sea-gown scarfd about me, in the dark
    Gropd I to find out them: had my desire;
    Fingerd their packet;

are of his quite mature. Both workmanship and thought are in an unstable
condition. We are surely justified in attributing the play, with that
other profoundly interesting play of intractable material and
astonishing versification, _Measure for Measure_, to a period of crisis,
after which follow the tragic successes which culminate in _Coriolanus_.
_Coriolanus_ may be not as interesting as _Hamlet_, but it is, with
_Antony and Cleopatra_, Shakespeares most assured artistic success. And
probably more people have thought _Hamlet_ a work of art because they
found it interesting, than have found it interesting because it is a
work of art. It is the Mona Lisa of literature.

The grounds of _Hamlets_ failure are not immediately obvious. Mr.
Robertson is undoubtedly correct in concluding that the essential
emotion of the play is the feeling of a son towards a guilty mother:

    [Hamlets] tone is that of one who has suffered tortures on the
    score of his mothers degradation.... The guilt of a mother is an
    almost intolerable motive for drama, but it had to be maintained and
    emphasized to supply a psychological solution, or rather a hint of
    one.

This, however, is by no means the whole story. It is not merely the
guilt of a mother that cannot be handled as Shakespeare handled the
suspicion of Othello, the infatuation of Antony, or the pride of
Coriolanus. The subject might conceivably have expanded into a tragedy
like these, intelligible, self-complete, in the sunlight. _Hamlet_, like
the sonnets, is full of some stuff that the writer could not drag to
light, contemplate, or manipulate into art. And when we search for this
feeling, we find it, as in the sonnets, very difficult to localize. You
cannot point to it in the speeches; indeed, if you examine the two
famous soliloquies you see the versification of Shakespeare, but a
content which might be claimed by another, perhaps by the author of the
_Revenge of Bussy dAmbois_, Act V. sc. i. We find Shakespeares
_Hamlet_ not in the action, not in any quotations that we might select,
so much as in an unmistakable tone which is unmistakably not in the
earlier play.

The only way of expressing emotion in the form of art is by finding an
objective correlative; in other words, a set of objects, a situation,
a chain of events which shall be the formula of that _particular_
emotion; such that when the external facts, which must terminate in
sensory experience, are given, the emotion is immediately evoked. If you
examine any of Shakespeares more successful tragedies, you will find
this exact equivalence; you will find that the state of mind of Lady
Macbeth walking in her sleep has been communicated to you by a skilful
accumulation of imagined sensory impressions; the words of Macbeth on
hearing of his wifes death strike us as if, given the sequence of
events, these words were automatically released by the last event in the
series. The artistic inevitability lies in this complete adequacy of
the external to the emotion; and this is precisely what is deficient in
_Hamlet_. Hamlet (the man) is dominated by an emotion which is
inexpressible, because it is in _excess_ of the facts as they appear.
And the supposed identity of Hamlet with his author is genuine to this
point: that Hamlets bafflement at the absence of objective equivalent
to his feelings is a prolongation of the bafflement of his creator in
the face of his artistic problem. Hamlet is up against the difficulty
that his disgust is occasioned by his mother, but that his mother is not
an adequate equivalent for it; his disgust envelops and exceeds her. It
is thus a feeling which he cannot understand; he cannot objectify it,
and it therefore remains to poison life and obstruct action. None of the
possible actions can satisfy it; and nothing that Shakespeare can do
with the plot can express Hamlet for him. And it must be noticed that
the very nature of the _donnes_ of the problem precludes objective
equivalence. To have heightened the criminality of Gertrude would have
been to provide the formula for a totally different emotion in Hamlet;
it is just _because_ her character is so negative and insignificant that
she arouses in Hamlet the feeling which she is incapable of
representing.

The madness of Hamlet lay to Shakespeares hand; in the earlier play a
simple ruse, and to the end, we may presume, understood as a ruse by the
audience. For Shakespeare it is less than madness and more than feigned.
The levity of Hamlet, his repetition of phrase, his puns, are not part
of a deliberate plan of dissimulation, but a form of emotional relief.
In the character Hamlet it is the buffoonery of an emotion which can
find no outlet in action; in the dramatist it is the buffoonery of an
emotion which he cannot express in art. The intense feeling, ecstatic or
terrible, without an object or exceeding its object, is something which
every person of sensibility has known; it is doubtless a study to
pathologists. It often occurs in adolescence: the ordinary person puts
these feelings to sleep, or trims down his feeling to fit the business
world; the artist keeps it alive by his ability to intensify the world
to his emotions. The Hamlet of Laforgue is an adolescent; the Hamlet of
Shakespeare is not, he has not that explanation and excuse. We must
simply admit that here Shakespeare tackled a problem which proved too
much for him. Why he attempted it at all is an insoluble puzzle; under
compulsion of what experience he attempted to express the inexpressibly
horrible, we cannot ever know. We need a great many facts in his
biography; and we should like to know whether, and when, and after or at
the same time as what personal experience, he read Montaigne, II. xii.,
_Apologie de Raimond Sebond_. We should have, finally, to know something
which is by hypothesis unknowable, for we assume it to be an experience
which, in the manner indicated, exceeded the facts. We should have to
understand things which Shakespeare did not understand himself.




                               Ben Jonson


The reputation of Jonson has been of the most deadly kind that can be
compelled upon the memory of a great poet. To be universally accepted;
to be damned by the praise that quenches all desire to read the book; to
be afflicted by the imputation of the virtues which excite the least
pleasure; and to be read only by historians and antiquariesthis is the
most perfect conspiracy of approval. For some generations the reputation
of Jonson has been carried rather as a liability than as an asset in the
balance-sheet of English literature. No critic has succeeded in making
him appear pleasurable or even interesting. Swinburnes book on Jonson
satisfies no curiosity and stimulates no thought. For the critical study
in the Men of Letters Series by Mr. Gregory Smith there is a place; it
satisfies curiosity, it supplies many just observations, it provides
valuable matter on the neglected masques; it only fails to remodel the
image of Jonson which is settled in our minds. Probably the fault lies
with several generations of our poets. It is not that the value of
poetry is only its value to living poets for their own work; but
appreciation is akin to creation, and true enjoyment of poetry is
related to the stirring of suggestion, the stimulus that a poet feels in
his enjoyment of other poetry. Jonson has provided no creative stimulus
for a very long time; consequently we must look back as far as
Drydenprecisely, a poetic practitioner who learned from Jonsonbefore
we find a living criticism of Jonsons work.

Yet there are possibilities for Jonson even now. We have no difficulty
in seeing what brought him to this pass; how, in contrast, not with
Shakespeare, but with Marlowe, Webster, Donne, Beaumont, and Fletcher,
he has been paid out with reputation instead of enjoyment. He is no less
a poet than these men, but his poetry is of the surface. Poetry of the
surface cannot be understood without study; for to deal with the surface
of life, as Jonson dealt with it, is to deal so deliberately that we too
must be deliberate, in order to understand. Shakespeare, and smaller men
also, are in the end more difficult, but they offer something at the
start to encourage the student or to satisfy those who want nothing
more; they are suggestive, evocative, a phrase, a voice; they offer
poetry in detail as well as in design. So does Dante offer something, a
phrase everywhere (_tu se ombra ed ombra vedi_) even to readers who
have no Italian; and Dante and Shakespeare have poetry of design as well
as of detail. But the polished veneer of Jonson reflects only the lazy
readers fatuity; unconscious does not respond to unconscious; no swarms
of inarticulate feelings are aroused. The immediate appeal of Jonson is
to the mind; his emotional tone is not in the single verse, but in the
design of the whole. But not many people are capable of discovering for
themselves the beauty which is only found after labour; and Jonsons
industrious readers have been those whose interest was historical and
curious, and those who have thought that in discovering the historical
and curious interest they had discovered the artistic value as well.
When we say that Jonson requires study, we do not mean study of his
classical scholarship or of seventeenth-century manners. We mean
intelligent saturation in his work as a whole; we mean that in order to
enjoy him at all, we must get to the centre of his work and his
temperament, and that we must see him unbiased by time, as a
contemporary. And to see him as a contemporary does not so much require
the power of putting ourselves into seventeenth-century London as it
requires the power of setting Jonson in our London: a more difficult
triumph of divination.

It is generally conceded that Jonson failed as a tragic dramatist; and
it is usually agreed that he failed because his genius was for satiric
comedy and because of the weight of pedantic learning with which he
burdened his two tragic failures. The second point marks an obvious
error of detail; the first is too crude a statement to be accepted; to
say that he failed because his genius was unsuited to tragedy is to tell
us nothing at all. Jonson did not write a good tragedy, but we can see
no reason why he should not have written one. If two plays so different
as _The Tempest_ and _The Silent Woman_ are both comedies, surely the
category of tragedy could be made wide enough to include something
possible for Jonson to have done. But the classification of tragedy and
comedy, while it may be sufficient to mark the distinction in a dramatic
literature of more rigid form and treatmentit may distinguish
Aristophanes from Euripidesis not adequate to a drama of such
variations as the Elizabethans. Tragedy is a crude classification for
plays so different in their tone as _Macbeth_, _The Jew of Malta_, and
_The Witch of Edmonton_; and it does not help us much to say that _The
Merchant of Venice_ and _The Alchemist_ are comedies. Jonson had his own
scale, his own instrument. The merit which _Catiline_ possesses is the
same merit that is exhibited more triumphantly in _Volpone_; _Catiline_
fails, not because it is too laboured and conscious, but because it is
not conscious enough; because Jonson in this play was not alert to his
own idiom, not clear in his mind as to what his temperament wanted him
to do. In _Catiline_ Jonson conforms, or attempts to conform, to
conventions; not to the conventions of antiquity, which he had
exquisitely under control, but to the conventions of tragico-historical
drama of his time. It is not the Latin erudition that sinks _Catiline_,
but the application of that erudition to a form which was not the proper
vehicle for the mind which had amassed the erudition.

If you look at _Catiline_that dreary Pyrrhic victory of tragedyyou
find two passages to be successful: Act II. scene i, the dialogue of the
political ladies, and the Prologue of Syllas ghost. These two passages
are genial. The soliloquy of the ghost is a characteristic Jonson
success in content and in versification

    Dost thou not feel me, Rome? not yet! is night
    So heavy on thee, and my weight so light?
    Can Syllas ghost arise within thy walls,
    Less threatening than an earthquake, the quick falls
    Of thee and thine? Shake not the frighted heads
    Of thy steep towers, or shrink to their first beds?
    Or as their ruin the large Tyber fills,
    Make that swell up, and drown thy seven proud hills?...

This is the learned, but also the creative, Jonson. Without concerning
himself with the character of Sulla, and in lines of invective, Jonson
makes Syllas ghost, while the words are spoken, a living and terrible
force. The words fall with as determined beat as if they were the will
of the morose Dictator himself. You may say: merely invective; but mere
invective, even if as superior to the clumsy fisticuffs of Marston and
Hall as Jonsons verse is superior to theirs, would not create a living
figure as Jonson has done in this long tirade. And you may say:
rhetoric; but if we are to call it rhetoric we must subject that term
to a closer dissection than any to which it is accustomed. What Jonson
has done here is not merely a fine speech. It is the careful, precise
filling in of a strong and simple outline, and at no point does it
overflow the outline; it is far more careful and precise in its
obedience to this outline than are many of the speeches in
_Tamburlaine_. The outline is not Sulla, for Sulla has nothing to do
with it, but Syllas ghost. The words may not be suitable to an
historical Sulla, or to anybody in history, but they are a perfect
expression for Syllas ghost. You cannot say they are rhetorical
because people do not talk like that, you cannot call them verbiage;
they do not exhibit prolixity or redundancy or the other vices in the
rhetoric books; there is a definite artistic emotion which demands
expression at that length. The words themselves are mostly simple words,
the syntax is natural, the language austere rather than adorned. Turning
then to the induction of _The Poetaster_, we find another success of the
same kind

    Light, I salute thee, but with wounded nerves....

Men may not talk in that way, but the spirit of envy does, and in the
words of Jonson envy is a real and living person. It is not human life
that informs envy and Syllas ghost, but it is energy of which human
life is only another variety.

Returning to _Catiline_, we find that the best scene in the body of the
play is one which cannot be squeezed into a tragic frame, and which
appears to belong to satiric comedy. The scene between Fulvia and Galla
and Sempronia is a living scene in a wilderness of oratory. And as it
recalls other scenesthere is a suggestion of the college of ladies in
_The Silent Woman_it looks like a comedy scene. And it appears to be
satire.

    They shall all give and pay well, that come here,
    If they will have it; and that, jewels, pearl,
    Plate, or round sums to buy these. Im not taken
    With a cob-swan or a high-mounting bull,
    As foolish Leda and Europa were;
    But the bright gold, with Dana. For such price
    I would endure a rough, harsh Jupiter,
    Or ten such thundering gamesters, and refrain
    To laugh at em, till they are gone, with my much suffering.

This scene is no more comedy than it is tragedy, and the satire is
merely a medium for the essential emotion. Jonsons drama is only
incidentally satire, because it is only incidentally a criticism upon
the actual world. It is not satire in the way in which the work of Swift
or the work of Molire may be called satire: that is, it does not find
its source in any precise emotional attitude or precise intellectual
criticism of the actual world. It is satire perhaps as the work of
Rabelais is satire; certainly not more so. The important thing is that
if fiction can be divided into creative fiction and critical fiction,
Jonsons is creative. That he was a great critic, our first great
critic, does not affect this assertion. Every creator is also a critic;
Jonson was a conscious critic, but he was also conscious in his
creations. Certainly, one sense in which the term critical may be
applied to fiction is a sense in which the term might be used of a
method antithetical to Jonsons. It is the method of _Education
Sentimentale_. The characters of Jonson, of Shakespeare, perhaps of all
the greatest drama, are drawn in positive and simple outlines. They may
be filled in, and by Shakespeare they are filled in, by much detail or
many shifting aspects; but a clear and sharp and simple form remains
through thesethough it would be hard to say in what the clarity and
sharpness and simplicity of Hamlet consists. But Frdric Moreau is not
made in that way. He is constructed partly by negative definition, built
up by a great number of observations. We cannot isolate him from the
environment in which we find him; it may be an environment which is or
can be much universalized; nevertheless it, and the figure in it,
consist of very many observed particular facts, the actual world.
Without this world the figure dissolves. The ruling faculty is a
critical perception, a commentary upon experienced feeling and
sensation. If this is true of Flaubert, it is true in a higher degree of
Molire than of Jonson. The broad farcical lines of Molire may seem to
be the same drawing as Jonsons. But Moliresay in Alceste or Monsieur
Jourdainis criticizing the actual; the reference to the actual world is
more direct. And having a more tenuous reference, the work of Jonson is
much less directly satirical.

This leads us to the question of Humours. Largely on the evidence of the
two Humour plays, it is sometimes assumed that Jonson is occupied with
types; typical exaggerations, or exaggerations of type. The Humour
definition, the expressed intention of Jonson, may be satisfactory for
these two plays. _Every Man in his Humour_ is the first mature work of
Jonson, and the student of Jonson must study it; but it is not the play
in which Jonson found his genius: it is the last of his plays to read
first. If one reads _Volpone_, and after that re-reads the _Jew of
Malta_; then returns to Jonson and reads _Bartholomew Fair_, _The
Alchemist_, _Epicne_ and _The Devil is an Ass_, and finally _Catiline_,
it is possible to arrive at a fair opinion of the poet and the
dramatist.

The Humour, even at the beginning, is not a type, as in Marstons
satire, but a simplified and somewhat distorted individual with a
typical mania. In the later work, the Humour definition quite fails to
account for the total effect produced. The characters of Shakespeare are
such as might exist in different circumstances than those in which
Shakespeare sets them. The latter appear to be those which extract from
the characters the most intense and interesting realization; but that
realization has not exhausted their possibilities. Volpones life, on
the other hand, is bounded by the scene in which it is played; in fact,
the life is the life of the scene and is derivatively the life of
Volpone; the life of the character is inseparable from the life of the
drama. This is not dependence upon a background, or upon a substratum of
fact. The emotional effect is single and simple. Whereas in Shakespeare
the effect is due to the way in which the characters _act upon_ one
another, in Jonson it is given by the way in which the characters _fit
in_ with each other. The artistic result of _Volpone_ is not due to any
effect that Volpone, Mosca, Corvino, Corbaccio, Voltore have upon each
other, but simply to their combination into a whole. And these figures
are not personifications of passions; separately, they have not even
that reality, they are constituents. It is a similar indication of
Jonsons method that you can hardly pick out a line of Jonsons and say
confidently that it is great poetry; but there are many extended
passages to which you cannot deny that honour.

    I will have all my beds blown up, not stuft;
    Down is too hard; and then, mine oval room
    Filld with such pictures as Tiberius took
    From Elephantis, and dull Aretine
    But coldly imitated. Then, my glasses
    Cut in more subtle angles, to disperse
    And multiply the figures, as I walk....

Jonson is the legitimate heir of Marlowe. The man who wrote, in
_Volpone_:

                                for thy love,
    In varying figures, I would have contended
    With the blue Proteus, or the hornd flood....

and

                        See, a carbuncle
    May put out both the eyes of our Saint Mark;
    A diamond would have bought Lollia Paulina,
    When she came in like star-light, hid with jewels....

is related to Marlowe as a poet; and if Marlowe is a poet, Jonson is
also. And, if Jonsons comedy is a comedy of humours, then Marlowes
tragedy, a large part of it, is a tragedy of humours. But Jonson has too
exclusively been considered as the typical representative of a point of
view toward comedy. He has suffered from his great reputation as a
critic and theorist, from the effects of his intelligence. We have been
taught to think of him as the man, the dictator (confusedly in our minds
with his later namesake), as the literary politician impressing his
views upon a generation; we are offended by the constant reminder of his
scholarship. We forget the comedy in the humours, and the serious artist
in the scholar. Jonson has suffered in public opinion, as anyone must
suffer who is forced to talk about his art.

If you examine the first hundred lines or more of _Volpone_ the verse
appears to be in the manner of Marlowe, more deliberate, more mature,
but without Marlowes inspiration. It looks like mere rhetoric,
certainly not deeds and language such as men do use! It appears to us,
in fact, forced and flagitious bombast. That it is not rhetoric, or at
least not vicious rhetoric, we do not know until we are able to review
the whole play. For the consistent maintenance of this manner conveys in
the end an effect not of verbosity, but of bold, even shocking and
terrifying directness. We have difficulty in saying exactly what
produces this simple and single effect. It is not in any ordinary way
due to management of intrigue. Jonson employs immense dramatic
constructive skill: it is not so much skill in plot as skill in doing
without a plot. He never manipulates as complicated a plot as that of
_The Merchant of Venice_; he has in his best plays nothing like the
intrigue of Restoration comedy. In _Bartholomew Fair_ it is hardly a
plot at all; the marvel of the play is the bewildering rapid chaotic
action of the fair; it is the fair itself, not anything that happens to
take place in the fair. In _Volpone_, or _The Alchemist_, or _The Silent
Woman_, the plot is enough to keep the players in motion; it is rather
an action than a plot. The plot does not hold the play together; what
holds the play together is a unity of inspiration that radiates into
plot and personages alike.

We have attempted to make more precise the sense in which it was said
that Jonsons work is of the surface; carefully avoiding the word
superficial. For there is work contemporary with Jonsons which is
superficial in a pejorative sense in which the word cannot be applied to
Jonsonthe work of Beaumont and Fletcher. If we look at the work of
Jonsons great contemporaries, Shakespeare, and also Donne and Webster
and Tourneur (and sometimes Middleton), have a depth, a third dimension,
as Mr. Gregory Smith rightly calls it, which Jonsons work has not.
Their words have often a network of tentacular roots reaching down to
the deepest terrors and desires. Jonsons most certainly have not; but
in Beaumont and Fletcher we may think that at times we find it. Looking
closer, we discover that the blossoms of Beaumont and Fletchers
imagination draw no sustenance from the soil, but are cut and slightly
withered flowers stuck into sand.

    Wilt thou, hereafter, when they talk of me,
    As thou shalt hear nothing but infamy,
    Remember some of these things?...
    I pray thee, do; for thou shalt never see me so again.

    Hair woven in many a curious warp,
    Able in endless error to enfold
    The wandering soul;...

Detached from its context, this looks like the verse of the greater
poets; just as lines of Jonson, detached from their context, look like
inflated or empty fustian. But the evocative quality of the verse of
Beaumont and Fletcher depends upon a clever appeal to emotions and
associations which they have not themselves grasped; it is hollow. It is
superficial with a vacuum behind it; the superficies of Jonson is solid.
It is what it is; it does not pretend to be another thing. But it is so
very conscious and deliberate that we must look with eyes alert to the
whole before we apprehend the significance of any part. We cannot call a
mans work superficial when it is the creation of a world; a man cannot
be accused of dealing superficially with the world which he himself has
created; the superficies _is_ the world. Jonsons characters conform to
the logic of the emotions of their world. It is a world like
Lobatchevskys; the worlds created by artists like Jonson are like
systems of non-Euclidean geometry. They are not fancy, because they have
a logic of their own; and this logic illuminates the actual world,
because it gives us a new point of view from which to inspect it.

A writer of power and intelligence, Jonson endeavoured to promulgate, as
a formula and programme of reform, what he chose to do himself; and he
not unnaturally laid down in abstract theory what is in reality a
personal point of view. And it is in the end of no value to discuss
Jonsons theory and practice unless we recognize and seize this point of
view, which escapes the formul, and which is what makes his plays worth
reading. Jonson behaved as the great creative mind that he was: he
created his own world, a world from which his followers, as well as the
dramatists who were trying to do something wholly different, are
excluded. Remembering this, we turn to Mr. Gregory Smiths
objectionthat Jonsons characters lack the third dimension, have no
life out of the theatrical existence in which they appearand demand an
inquest. The objection implies that the characters are purely the work
of intellect, or the result of superficial observation of a world which
is faded or mildewed. It implies that the characters are lifeless. But
if we dig beneath the theory, beneath the observation, beneath the
deliberate drawing and the theatrical and dramatic elaboration, there is
discovered a kind of power, animating Volpone, Busy, Fitzdottrel, the
literary ladies of _Epicne_, even Bobadil, which comes from below the
intellect, and for which no theory of humours will account. And it is
the same kind of power which vivifies Trimalchio, and Panurge, and some
but not all of the comic characters of Dickens. The fictive life of
this kind is not to be circumscribed by a reference to comedy or to
farce; it is not exactly the kind of life which informs the characters
of Molire or that which informs those of Marivauxtwo writers who were,
besides, doing something quite different the one from the other. But it
is something which distinguishes Barabas from Shylock, Epicure Mammon
from Falstaff, Faustus fromif you willMacbeth; Marlowe and Jonson from
Shakespeare and the Shakespearians, Webster, and Tourneur. It is not
merely Humours: for neither Volpone nor Mosca is a humour. No theory of
humours could account for Jonsons best plays or the best characters in
them. We want to know at what point the comedy of humours passes into a
work of art, and why Jonson is not Brome.

The creation of a work of art, we will say the creation of a character
in a drama, consists in the process of transfusion of the personality,
or, in a deeper sense, the life, of the author into the character. This
is a very different matter from the orthodox creation in ones own
image. The ways in which the passions and desires of the creator may be
satisfied in the work of art are complex and devious. In a painter they
may take the form of a predilection for certain colours, tones, or
lightings; in a writer the original impulse may be even more strangely
transmuted. Now, we may say with Mr. Gregory Smith that Falstaff or a
score of Shakespeares characters have a third dimension that Jonsons
have not. This will mean, not that Shakespeares spring from the
feelings or imagination and Jonsons from the intellect or invention;
they have equally an emotional source; but that Shakespeares represent
a more complex tissue of feelings and desires, as well as a more supple,
a more susceptible temperament. Falstaff is not only the roast
Malmesbury ox with the pudding in his belly; he also grows old, and,
finally, his nose is as sharp as a pen. He was perhaps the
_satisfaction_ of more, and of more complicated feelings; and perhaps he
was, as the great tragic characters must have been, the offspring of
deeper, less apprehensible feelings: deeper, but not necessarily
stronger or more intense, than those of Jonson. It is obvious that the
spring of the difference is not the difference between feeling and
thought, or superior insight, superior perception, on the part of
Shakespeare, but his susceptibility to a greater range of emotion, and
emotion deeper and more obscure. But his characters are no more alive
than are the characters of Jonson.

The world they live in is a larger one. But small worldsthe worlds
which artists createdo not differ only in magnitude; if they are
complete worlds, drawn to scale in every part, they differ in kind also.
And Jonsons world has this scale. His type of personality found its
relief in something falling under the category of burlesque or
farcethough when you are dealing with a _unique_ world, like his, these
terms fail to appease the desire for definition. It is not, at all
events, the farce of Molire: the latter is more analytic, more an
intellectual redistribution. It is not defined by the word satire.
Jonson poses as a satirist. But satire like Jonsons is great in the end
not by hitting off its object, but by creating it; the satire is merely
the means which leads to the sthetic result, the impulse which projects
a new world into a new orbit. In _Every Man in his Humour_ there is a
neat, a very neat, comedy of humours. In discovering and proclaiming in
this play the new genre Jonson was simply recognizing, unconsciously,
the route which opened out in the proper direction for his instincts.
His characters are and remain, like Marlowes, simplified characters;
but the simplification does not consist in the dominance of a particular
humour or monomania. That is a very superficial account of it. The
simplification consists largely in reduction of detail, in the seizing
of aspects relevant to the relief of an emotional impulse which remains
the same for that character, in making the character conform to a
particular setting. This stripping is essential to the art, to which is
also essential a flat distortion in the drawing; it is an art of
caricature, of great caricature, like Marlowes. It is a great
caricature, which is beautiful; and a great humour, which is serious.
The world of Jonson is sufficiently large; it is a world of poetic
imagination; it is sombre. He did not get the third dimension, but he
was not trying to get it.

If we approach Jonson with less frozen awe of his learning, with a
clearer understanding of his rhetoric and its applications, if we
grasp the fact that the knowledge required of the reader is not
archology but knowledge of Jonson, we can derive not only instruction
in non Euclidean humanitybut enjoyment. We can even apply him, be aware
of him as a part of our literary inheritance craving further expression.
Of all the dramatists of his time, Jonson is probably the one whom the
present age would find the most sympathetic, if it knew him. There is a
brutality, a lack of sentiment, a polished surface, a handling of large
bold designs in brilliant colours, which ought to attract about three
thousand people in London and elsewhere. At least, if we had a
contemporary Shakespeare and a contemporary Jonson, it would be the
Jonson who would arouse the enthusiasm of the intelligentsia! Though he
is saturated in literature, he never sacrifices the theatrical
qualitiestheatrical in the most favourable senseto literature or to
the study of character. His work is a titanic show. But Jonsons
masques, an important part of his work, are neglected; our flaccid
culture lets shows and literature fade, but prefers faded literature to
faded shows. There are hundreds of people who have read _Comus_ to ten
who have read the _Masque of Blackness_. _Comus_ contains fine poetry,
and poetry exemplifying some merits to which Jonsons masque poetry
cannot pretend. Nevertheless, _Comus_ is the death of the masque; it is
the transition of a form of arteven of a form which existed for but a
short generationinto literature, literature cast in a form which has
lost its application. Even though _Comus_ was a masque at Ludlow Castle,
Jonson had, what Milton came perhaps too late to have, a sense for
living art; his art was applied. The masques can still be read, and with
pleasure, by anyone who will take the troublea trouble which in this
part of Jonson is, indeed, a study of antiquitiesto imagine them in
action, displayed with the music, costume, dances, and the scenery of
Inigo Jones. They are additional evidence that Jonson had a fine sense
of form, of the purpose for which a particular form is intended;
evidence that he was a literary artist even more than he was a man of
letters.




                            Philip Massinger

                                   I

Massinger has been more fortunately and more fairly judged than several
of his greater contemporaries. Three critics have done their best by
him: the notes of Coleridge exemplify Coleridges fragmentary and fine
perceptions; the essay of Leslie Stephen is a piece of formidable
destructive analysis; and the essay of Swinburne is Swinburnes
criticism at its best. None of these, probably, has put Massinger
finally and irrefutably into a place.

English criticism is inclined to argue or persuade rather than to state;
and, instead of forcing the subject to expose himself, these critics
have left in their work an undissolved residuum of their own good taste,
which, however impeccable, is something that requires our faith. The
principles which animate this taste remain unexplained. Mr.
Cruickshanks book is a work of scholarship; and the advantage of good
scholarship is that it presents us with evidence which is an invitation
to the critical faculty of the reader: it bestows a method, rather than
a judgment.

It is difficultit is perhaps the supreme difficulty of criticismto
make the facts generalize themselves; but Mr. Cruickshank at least
presents us with facts which are capable of generalization. This is a
service of value; and it is therefore wholly a compliment to the author
to say that his appendices are as valuable as the essay itself.

The sort of labour to which Mr. Cruickshank has devoted himself is one
that professed critics ought more willingly to undertake. It is an
important part of criticism, more important than any mere expression of
opinion. To understand Elizabethan drama it is necessary to study a
dozen playwrights at once, to dissect with all care the complex growth,
to ponder collaboration to the utmost line. Reading Shakespeare and
several of his contemporaries is pleasure enough, perhaps all the
pleasure possible, for most. But if we wish to consummate and refine
this pleasure by understanding it, to distil the last drop of it, to
press and press the essence of each author, to apply exact measurement
to our own sensations, then we must compare; and we cannot compare
without parcelling the threads of authorship and influence. We must
employ Mr. Cruickshanks method to examine Mr. Cruickshanks judgments;
and perhaps the most important judgment to which he has committed
himself is this:

    Massinger, in his grasp of stagecraft, his flexible metre, his
    desire in the sphere of ethics to exploit both vice and virtue, is
    typical of an age which had much culture, but which, without being
    exactly corrupt, lacked moral fibre.

Here, in fact, is our text: to elucidate this sentence would be to
account for Massinger. We begin vaguely with good taste, by a
recognition that Massinger is inferior: can we trace this inferiority,
dissolve it, and have left any element of merit?

We turn first to the parallel quotations from Massinger and Shakespeare
collocated by Mr. Cruickshank to make manifest Massingers indebtedness.
One of the surest of tests is the way in which a poet borrows. Immature
poets imitate; mature poets steal; bad poets deface what they take, and
good poets make it into something better, or at least something
different. The good poet welds his theft into a whole of feeling which
is unique, utterly different from that from which it was torn; the bad
poet throws it into something which has no cohesion. A good poet will
usually borrow from authors remote in time, or alien in language, or
diverse in interest. Chapman borrowed from Seneca; Shakespeare and
Webster from Montaigne. The two great followers of Shakespeare, Webster
and Tourneur, in their mature work do not borrow from him; he is too
close to them to be of use to them in this way. Massinger, as Mr.
Cruickshank shows, borrows from Shakespeare a good deal. Let us profit
by some of the quotations with which he has provided us

    _Massinger_: Can I call back yesterday, with all their aids
                 That bow unto my sceptre? or restore
                 My mind to that tranquillity and peace
                 It then enjoyed?

    _Shakespeare_: Not poppy, nor mandragora,
                   Nor all the drowsy syrops of the world
                   Shall ever medecine thee to that sweet sleep
                   Which thou owedst yesterday.

Massingers is a general rhetorical question, the language just and
pure, but colourless. Shakespeares has particular significance; and the
adjective drowsy and the verb medecine infuse a precise vigour. This
is, on Massingers part, an echo rather than an imitation or a
plagiarismthe basest, because least conscious form of borrowing.
Drowsy syrop is a condensation of meaning frequent in Shakespeare, but
rare in Massinger.

    _Massinger_: Thou didst not borrow of Vice her indirect,
            Crooked, and abject means.

    _Shakespeare_: God knows, my son,
             By what by-paths and indirect crookd ways
             I met this crown.

Here, again, Massinger gives the general forensic statement, Shakespeare
the particular image. Indirect crookd is forceful in Shakespeare; a
mere pleonasm in Massinger. Crookd ways is a metaphor; Massingers
phrase only the ghost of a metaphor.

    _Massinger_: And now, in the evening,
            When thou shoud'st pass with honour to thy rest,
            Wilt thou fall like a meteor?

    _Shakespeare_: I shall fall
              Like a bright exhalation in the evening,
              And no man see me more.

Here the lines of Massinger have their own beauty. Still, a bright
exhalation appears to the eye and makes us catch our breath in the
evening; meteor is a dim simile; the word is worn.

    _Massinger_: What you deliver to me shall be lockd up
            In a strong cabinet, of which you yourself
            Shall keep the key.

    _Shakespeare_: Tis in my memory locked,
              And you yourself shall keep the key of it.

In the preceding passage Massinger had squeezed his simile to death,
here he drags it round the city at his heels; and how swift
Shakespeares figure is! We may add two more passages, not given by our
commentator; here the model is Webster. They occur on the same page, an
artless confession.

                 Here he comes,
    His nose held up; he hath something in the wind,

is hardly comparable to the Cardinal lifts up his nose like a foul
porpoise before a storm, and when we come upon

              as tannd galley-slaves
    Pay such as do redeem them from the oar

it is unnecessary to turn up the great lines in the _Duchess of Malfi_.
Massinger fancied this galley-slave; for he comes with his oar again in
the _Bondman_

    Never did galley-slave shake off his chains,
    Or looked on his redemption from the oar....

Now these are mature plays; and the _Roman Actor_ (from which we have
drawn the two previous extracts) is said to have been the preferred play
of its author.

We may conclude directly from these quotations that Massingers feeling
for language had outstripped his feeling for things; that his eye and
his vocabulary were not in close co-operation. One of the greatest
distinctions of several of his elder contemporarieswe name Middleton,
Webster, Tourneuris a gift for combining, for fusing into a single
phrase, two or more diverse impressions.

    ... in her strong toil of grace

of Shakespeare is such a fusion; the metaphor identifies itself with
what suggests it; the resultant is one and is unique

    Does the silk worm _expend_ her _yellow labours_?...
    Why does yon fellow _falsify highways_
    And lays his life between the judges lips
    To _refine_ such a one? keeps horse and men
    To _beat their valours_ for her?

    Let the common sewer take it from distinction....
    Lust and forgetfulness have been amongst us....

These lines of Tourneur and of Middleton exhibit that perpetual slight
alteration of language, words perpetually juxtaposed in new and sudden
combinations, meanings perpetually _eingeschachtelt_ into meanings,
which evidences a very high development of the senses, a development of
the English language which we have perhaps never equalled. And, indeed,
with the end of Chapman, Middleton, Webster, Tourneur, Donne we end a
period when the intellect was immediately at the tips of the senses.
Sensation became word and the word was sensation. The next period is the
period of Milton (though still with a Marvell in it); and this period is
initiated by Massinger.

It is not that the word becomes less exact. Massinger is, in a wholly
eulogistic sense, choice and correct. And the decay of the senses is not
inconsistent with a greater sophistication of language. But every vital
development in language is a development of feeling as well. The verse
of Shakespeare and the major Shakespearian dramatists is an innovation
of this kind, a true mutation of species. The verse practised by
Massinger is a different verse from that of his predecessors; but it is
not a development based on, or resulting from, a new way of feeling. On
the contrary, it seems to lead us away from feeling altogether.

We mean that Massinger must be placed as much at the beginning of one
period as at the end of another. A certain Boyle, quoted by Mr.
Cruickshank, says that Miltons blank verse owes much to the study of
Massingers.

    In the indefinable touches which make up the music of a verse [says
    Boyle], in the artistic distribution of pauses, and in the unerring
    choice and grouping of just those words which strike the ear as the
    perfection of harmony, there are, if we leave Cyril Tourneurs
    _Atheists Tragedy_ out of the question, only two masters in the
    drama, Shakespeare in his latest period and Massinger.

This Boyle must have had a singular ear to have preferred Tourneurs
apprentice work to his _Revengers Tragedy_, and one must think that he
had never glanced at Ford. But though the appraisal be ludicrous, the
praise is not undeserved. Mr. Cruickshank has given us an excellent
example of Massingers syntax

                      What though my father
    Writ man before he was so, and confirmd it,
    By numbering that day no part of his life
    In which he did not service to his country;
    Was he to be free therefore from the laws
    And ceremonious form in your decrees?
    Or else because he did as much as man
    In those three memorable overthrows,
    At Granson, Morat, Nancy, where his master,
    The warlike Charalois, with whose misfortunes
    I bear his name, lost treasure, men, and life,
    To be excused from payment of those sums
    Which (his own patrimony spent) his zeal
    To serve his country forced him to take up!

It is impossible to deny the masterly construction of this passage;
perhaps there is not one living poet who could do the like. It is
impossible to deny the originality. The language is pure and correct,
free from muddiness or turbidity. Massinger does not confuse metaphors,
or heap them one upon another. He is lucid, though not easy. But if
Massingers age, without being exactly corrupt, lacks moral fibre,
Massingers verse, without being exactly corrupt, suffers from cerebral
anmia. To say that an involved style is necessarily a bad style would
be preposterous. But such a style should follow the involutions of a
mode of perceiving, registering, and digesting impressions which is also
involved. It is to be feared that the feeling of Massinger is simple and
overlaid with received ideas. Had Massinger had a nervous system as
refined as that of Middleton, Tourneur, Webster, or Ford, his style
would be a triumph. But such a nature was not at hand, and Massinger
precedes, not another Shakespeare, but Milton.

Massinger is, in fact, at a further remove from Shakespeare than that
other precursor of MiltonJohn Fletcher. Fletcher was above all an
opportunist, in his verse, in his momentary effects, never quite a
pastiche; in his structure ready to sacrifice everything to the single
scene. To Fletcher, because he was more intelligent, less will be
forgiven. Fletcher had a cunning guess at feelings, and betrayed them;
Massinger was unconscious and innocent. As an artisan of the theatre he
is not inferior to Fletcher, and his best tragedies have an honester
unity than _Bonduca_. But the unity is superficial. In the _Roman Actor_
the development of parts is out of all proportion to the central theme;
in the _Unnatural Combat_, in spite of the deft handling of suspense and
the quick shift from climax to a new suspense, the first part of the
play is the hatred of Malefort for his son and the second part is his
passion for his daughter. It is theatrical skill, not an artistic
conscience arranging emotions, that holds the two parts together. In the
_Duke of Milan_ the appearance of Sforza at the Court of his conqueror
only delays the action, or rather breaks the emotional rhythm. And we
have named three of Massingers best.

A dramatist who so skilfully welds together parts which have no reason
for being together, who fabricates plays so well knit and so remote from
unity, we should expect to exhibit the same synthetic cunning in
character. Mr. Cruickshank, Coleridge, and Leslie Stephen are pretty
well agreed that Massinger is no master of characterization. You can, in
fact, put together heterogeneous parts to form a lively play; but a
character, to be living, must be conceived from some emotional unity. A
character is not to be composed of scattered observations of human
nature, but of parts which are felt together. Hence it is that although
Massingers failure to draw a moving character is no greater than his
failure to make a whole play, and probably springs from the same
defective sensitiveness, yet the failure in character is more
conspicuous and more disastrous. A living character is not necessarily
true to life. It is a person whom we can see and hear, whether he be
true or false to human nature as we know it. What the creator of
character needs is not so much knowledge of motives as keen sensibility;
the dramatist need not understand people; but he must be exceptionally
aware of them. This awareness was not given to Massinger. He inherits
the traditions of conduct, female chastity, hymeneal sanctity, the
fashion of honour, without either criticizing or informing them from his
own experience. In the earlier drama these conventions are merely a
framework, or an alloy necessary for working the metal; the metal itself
consisted of unique emotions resulting inevitably from the
circumstances, resulting or inhering as inevitably as the properties of
a chemical compound. Middletons heroine, for instance, in the
_Changeling_, exclaims in the well-known words

    Why, tis impossible thou canst be so wicked,
    To shelter such a cunning cruelty
    To make his death the murderer of my honour!

The word honour in such a situation is out of date, but the emotion of
Beatrice at that moment, given the conditions, is as permanent and
substantial as anything in human nature. The emotion of Othello in Act
V. is the emotion of a man who discovers that the worst part of his own
soul has been exploited by some one more clever than he; it is this
emotion carried by the writer to a very high degree of intensity. Even
in so late and so decayed a drama as that of Ford, the framework of
emotions and morals of the time is only the vehicle for statements of
feeling which are unique and imperishable: Fords and Fords only.

What may be considered corrupt or decadent in the morals of Massinger is
not an alteration or diminution in morals; it is simply the
disappearance of all the personal and real emotions which this morality
supported and into which it introduced a kind of order. As soon as the
emotions disappear the morality which ordered it appears hideous.
Puritanism itself became repulsive only when it appeared as the survival
of a restraint after the feelings which it restrained had gone. When
Massingers ladies resist temptation they do not appear to undergo any
important emotion; they merely know what is expected of them; they
manifest themselves to us as lubricious prudes. Any age has its
conventions; and any age might appear absurd when its conventions get
into the hands of a man like Massingera man, we mean, of so
exceptionally superior a literary talent as Massingers, and so paltry
an imagination. The Elizabethan morality was an important convention;
important because it was not consciously of one social class alone,
because it provided a framework for emotions to which all classes could
respond, and it hindered no feeling. It was not hypocritical, and it did
not suppress; its dark corners are haunted by the ghosts of Mary Fitton
and perhaps greater. It is a subject which has not been sufficiently
investigated. Fletcher and Massinger rendered it ridiculous; not by not
believing in it, but because they were men of great talents who could
not vivify it; because they could not fit into it passionate, complete
human characters.

The tragedy of Massinger is interesting chiefly according to the
definition given before; the highest degree of verbal excellence
compatible with the most rudimentary development of the senses.
Massinger succeeds better in something which is not tragedy; in the
romantic comedy. _A Very Woman_ deserves all the praise that Swinburne,
with his almost unerring gift for selection, has bestowed upon it. The
probable collaboration of Fletcher had the happiest result; for
certainly that admirable comic personage, the tipsy Borachia, is handled
with more humour than we expect of Massinger. It is a play which would
be enjoyable on the stage. The form, however, of romantic comedy is
itself inferior and decadent. There is an inflexibility about the poetic
drama which is by no means a matter of classical, or neoclassical, or
pseudo-classical law. The poetic drama might develop forms highly
different from those of Greece or England, India or Japan. Conceded the
utmost freedom, the romantic drama would yet remain inferior. The poetic
drama must have an emotional unity, let the emotion be whatever you
like. It must have a dominant tone; and if this be strong enough, the
most heterogeneous emotions may be made to reinforce it. The romantic
comedy is a skilful concoction of inconsistent emotion, a _revue_ of
emotion. _A Very Woman_ is surpassingly well plotted. The debility of
romantic drama does not depend upon extravagant setting, or preposterous
events, or inconceivable coincidences; all these might be found in a
serious tragedy or comedy. It consists in an internal incoherence of
feelings, a concatenation of emotions which signifies nothing.

From this type of play, so eloquent of emotional disorder, there was no
swing back of the pendulum. Changes never come by a simple reinfusion
into the form which the life has just left. The romantic drama was not a
new form. Massinger dealt not with emotions so much as with the social
abstractions of emotions, more generalized and therefore more quickly
and easily interchangeable within the confines of a single action. He
was not guided by direct communications through the nerves. Romantic
drama tended, accordingly, toward what is sometimes called the
typical, but which is not the truly typical; for the _typical_ figure
in a drama is always particularizedan individual. The tendency of the
romantic drama was toward a form which continued it in removing its more
conspicuous vices, was toward a more severe external order. This form
was the Heroic Drama. We look into Drydens Essay on Heroic Plays, and
we find that love and valour ought to be the subject of an heroic
poem. Massinger, in his destruction of the old drama, had prepared the
way for Dryden. The intellect had perhaps exhausted the old conventions.
It was not able to supply the impoverishment of feeling.

Such are the reflections aroused by an examination of some of
Massingers plays in the light of Mr. Cruickshanks statement that
Massingers age had much culture, but, without being exactly corrupt,
lacked moral fibre. The statement may be supported. In order to fit
into our estimate of Massinger the two admirable comedies_A New Way to
Pay Old Debts_ and _The City Madam_a more extensive research would be
required than is possible within our limits.


                                   II

Massingers tragedy may be summarized for the unprepared reader as being
very dreary. It is dreary, unless one is prepared by a somewhat
extensive knowledge of his livelier contemporaries to grasp without
fatigue precisely the elements in it which are capable of giving
pleasure; or unless one is incited by a curious interest in
versification. In comedy, however, Massinger was one of the few masters
in the language. He was a master in a comedy which is serious, even
sombre; and in one aspect of it there are only two names to mention with
his: those of Marlowe and Jonson. In comedy, as a matter of fact, a
greater variety of methods were discovered and employed than in tragedy.
The method of Kyd, as developed by Shakespeare, was the standard for
English tragedy down to Otway and to Shelley. But both individual
temperament, and varying epochs, made more play with comedy. The comedy
of Lyly is one thing; that of Shakespeare, followed by Beaumont and
Fletcher, is another; and that of Middleton is a third. And Massinger,
while he has his own comedy, is nearer to Marlowe and Jonson than to any
of these.

Massinger was, in fact, as a comic writer, fortunate in the moment at
which he wrote. His comedy is transitional; but it happens to be one of
those transitions which contain some merit not anticipated by
predecessors or refined upon by later writers. The comedy of Jonson is
nearer to caricature; that of Middleton a more photographic delineation
of low life. Massinger is nearer to Restoration comedy, and more like
his contemporary, Shirley, in assuming a certain social level, certain
distinctions of class, as a postulate of his comedy. This resemblance to
later comedy is also the important point of difference between Massinger
and earlier comedy. But Massingers comedy differs just as widely from
the comedy of manners proper; he is closer to that in his romantic
dramain _A Very Woman_than in _A New Way to Pay Old Debts_; in his
comedy his interest is not in the follies of love-making or the
absurdities of social pretence, but in the unmasking of villainy. Just
as the Old Comedy of Molire differs in principle from the New Comedy of
Marivaux, so the Old Comedy of Massinger differs from the New Comedy of
his contemporary Shirley. And as in France, so in England, the more
farcical comedy was the more serious. Massingers great comic rogues,
Sir Giles Overreach and Luke Frugal, are members of the large English
family which includes Barabas and Sir Epicure Mammon, and from which Sir
Tunbelly Clumsy claims descent.

What distinguishes Massinger from Marlowe and Jonson is in the main an
inferiority. The greatest comic characters of these two dramatists are
slight work in comparison with Shakespeares bestFalstaff has a third
dimension and Epicure Mammon has only two. But this slightness is part
of the nature of the art which Jonson practised, a smaller art than
Shakespeares. The inferiority of Massinger to Jonson is an inferiority,
not of one type of art to another, but within Jonsons type. It is a
simple deficiency. Marlowes and Jonsons comedies were a view of life;
they were, as great literature is, the transformation of a personality
into a personal work of art, their lifetimes work, long or short.
Massinger is not simply a smaller personality: his personality hardly
exists. He did not, out of his own personality, build a world of art, as
Shakespeare and Marlowe and Jonson built.

In the fine pages which Remy de Gourmont devotes to Flaubert in his
_Problme du Style_, the great critic declares:

    La vie est un dpouillement. Le but de lactivit propre de lhomme
    est de nettoyer sa personnalit, de la laver de toutes les
    souillures quy dposa lducation, de la dgager de toutes les
    empreintes quy laissrent nos admirations adolescentes;

and again:

    Flaubert incorporait toute sa sensibilit  ses uvres.... Hors de
    ses livres, o il se transvasait goutte  goutte, jusqu la lie,
    Flaubert est fort peu intressant....

Of Shakespeare notably, of Jonson less, of Marlowe (and of Keats to the
term of life allowed him), one can say that they _se transvasaient
goutte  goutte_; and in England, which has produced a prodigious number
of men of genius and comparatively few works of art, there are not many
writers of whom one can say it. Certainly not of Massinger. A brilliant
master of technique, he was not, in this profound sense, an artist. And
so we come to inquire how, if this is so, he could have written two
great comedies. We shall probably be obliged to conclude that a large
part of their excellence is, in some way which should be defined,
fortuitous; and that therefore they are, however remarkable, not works
of perfect art.

This objection raised by Leslie Stephen to Massingers method of
revealing a villain has great cogency; but I am inclined to believe that
the cogency is due to a somewhat different reason from that which Leslie
Stephen assigns. His statement is too _apriorist_ to be quite
trustworthy. There is no reason why a comedy or tragedy villain should
not declare himself, and in as long a period as the author likes; but
the sort of villain who may run on in this way is a simple villain
(simple not _simpliste_). Barabas and Volpone can declare their
character, because they have no inside; appearance and reality are
coincident; they are forces in particular directions. Massingers two
villains are not simple. Giles Overreach is essentially a great force
directed upon small objects; a great force, a small mind; the terror of
a dozen parishes instead of the conqueror of a world. The force is
misapplied, attenuated, thwarted, by the mans vulgarity: he is a great
man of the City, without fear, but with the most abject awe of the
aristocracy. He is accordingly not simple, but a product of a certain
civilization, and he is not wholly conscious. His monologues are meant
to be, not what he thinks he is, but what he really is: and yet they are
not the truth about him, and he himself certainly does not know the
truth. To declare himself, therefore, is impossible.

    Nay, when my ears are pierced with widows cries,
    And undone orphans wash with tears my threshold,
    I only think what tis to have my daughter
    Right honourable; and tis a powerful charm
    Makes me insensible of remorse, or pity,
    Or the least sting of conscience.

This is the wrong note. Elsewhere we have the right:

                         Thou art a fool;
    In being out of office, I am out of danger;
    Where, if I were a justice, besides the trouble,
    I might or out of wilfulness, or error,
    Run myself finely into a praemunire,
    And so become a prey to the informer,
    No, Ill have none oft; tis enough I keep
    Greedy at my devotion: so he serve
    My purposes, let him hang, or damn, I care not....

And how well tuned, well modulated, here, the diction! The man is
audible and visible. But from passages like the first we may be
permitted to infer that Massinger was unconscious of trying to develop a
different kind of character from any that Marlowe or Jonson had
invented.

Luke Frugal, in _The City Madam_, is not so great a character as Sir
Giles Overreach. But Luke Frugal just misses being almost the greatest
of all hypocrites. His humility in the first act of the play is more
than half real. The error in his portraiture is not the extravagant
hocus-pocus of supposed Indian necromancers by which he is so easily
duped, but the premature disclosure of villainy in his temptation of the
two apprentices of his brother. But for this, he would be a perfect
chameleon of circumstance. Here, again, we feel that Massinger was
conscious only of inventing a rascal of the old simpler farce type. But
the play is not a farce, in the sense in which _The Jew of Malta_, _The
Alchemist_, _Bartholomew Fair_ are farces. Massinger had not the
personality to create great farce, and he was too serious to invent
trivial farce. The ability to perform that slight distortion of _all_
the elements in the world of a play or a story, so that this world is
complete in itself, which was given to Marlowe and Jonson (and to
Rabelais) and which is prerequisite to great farce, was denied to
Massinger. On the other hand, his temperament was more closely related
to theirs than to that of Shirley or the Restoration wits. His two
comedies therefore occupy a place by themselves. His ways of thinking
and feeling isolate him from both the Elizabethan and the later Caroline
mind. He might almost have been a great realist; he is killed by
conventions which were suitable for the preceding literary generation,
but not for his. Had Massinger been a greater man, a man of more
intellectual courage, the current of English literature immediately
after him might have taken a different course. The defect is precisely a
defect of personality. He is not, however, the only man of letters who,
at the moment when a new view of life is wanted, has looked at life
through the eyes of his predecessors, and only at manners through his
own.




                           Swinburne as Poet


It is a question of some nicety to decide how much must be read of any
particular poet. And it is not a question merely of the size of the
poet. There are some poets whose every line has unique value. There are
others who can be taken by a few poems universally agreed upon. There
are others who need be read only in selections, but what selections are
read will not very much matter. Of Swinburne, we should like to have the
_Atalanta_ entire, and a volume of selections which should certainly
contain _The Leper_, _Laus Veneris_, and _The Triumph of Time_. It ought
to contain many more, but there is perhaps no other single poem which it
would be an error to omit. A student of Swinburne will want to read one
of the Stuart plays and dip into _Tristram of Lyonesse_. But almost no
one, to-day, will wish to read the whole of Swinburne. It is not because
Swinburne is voluminous; certain poets, equally voluminous, must be read
entire. The necessity and the difficulty of a selection are due to the
peculiar nature of Swinburnes contribution, which, it is hardly too
much to say, is of a very different kind from that of any other poet of
equal reputation.

We may take it as undisputed that Swinburne did make a contribution;
that he did something that had not been done before, and that what he
did will not turn out to be a fraud. And from that we may proceed to
inquire what Swinburnes contribution was, and why, whatever critical
solvents we employ to break down the structure of his verse, this
contribution remains. The test is this: agreed that we do not (and I
think that the present generation does not) greatly enjoy Swinburne, and
agreed that (a more serious condemnation) at one period of our lives we
did enjoy him and now no longer enjoy him; nevertheless, the words which
we use to state our grounds of dislike or indifference cannot be applied
to Swinburne as they can to bad poetry. The words of condemnation are
words which express his qualities. You may say diffuse. But the
diffuseness is essential; had Swinburne practised greater concentration
his verse would be, not better in the same kind, but a different thing.
His diffuseness is one of his glories. That so little material as
appears to be employed in _The Triumph of Time_ should release such an
amazing number of words, requires what there is no reason to call
anything but genius. You could not condense _The Triumph of Time_. You
could only leave out. And this would destroy the poem; though no one
stanza seems essential. Similarly, a considerable quantitya volume of
selectionsis necessary to give the quality of Swinburne although there
is perhaps no one poem essential in this selection.

If, then, we must be very careful in applying terms of censure, like
diffuse, we must be equally careful of praise. The beauty of
Swinburnes verse is the sound, people say, explaining, he had little
visual imagination. I am inclined to think that the word beauty is
hardly to be used in connection with Swinburnes verse at all; but in
any case the beauty or effect of sound is neither that of music nor that
of poetry which can be set to music. There is no reason why verse
intended to be sung should not present a sharp visual image or convey an
important intellectual meaning, for it supplements the music by another
means of affecting the feelings. What we get in Swinburne is an
expression by sound, which could not possibly associate itself with
music. For what he gives is not images and ideas and music, it is one
thing with a curious mixture of suggestions of all three.

    Shall I come, if I swim? wide are the waves, you see;
    Shall I come, if I fly, my dear Love, to thee?

This is Campion, and an example of the kind of music that is not to be
found in Swinburne. It is an arrangement and choice of words which has a
sound-value and at the same time a coherent comprehensible meaning, and
the two thingsthe musical value and meaningare two things, not one.
But in Swinburne there is no _pure_ beautyno pure beauty of sound, or
of image, or of idea.

    Music, when soft voices die,
    Vibrates in the memory;
    Odours, when sweet violets sicken,
    Live within the sense they quicken.

    Rose leaves, when the rose is dead,
    Are heaped for the beloveds bed;
    And so thy thoughts, when thou art gone,
    Love itself shall slumber on.

I quote from Shelley, because Shelley is supposed to be the master of
Swinburne; and because his song, like that of Campion, has what
Swinburne has nota beauty of music and a beauty of content; and because
it is clearly and simply expressed, with only two adjectives. Now, in
Swinburne the meaning and the sound are one thing. He is concerned with
the meaning of the word in a peculiar way: he employs, or rather
works, the words meaning. And this is connected with an interesting
fact about his vocabulary: he uses the most general word, because his
emotion is never particular, never in direct line of vision, never
focused; it is emotion reinforced, not by intensification, but by
expansion.

    There lived a singer in France of old
      By the tideless dolorous midland sea.
    In a land of sand and ruin and gold
      There shone one woman, and none but she.

You see that Provence is the merest point of diffusion here. Swinburne
defines the place by the most general word, which has for him its own
value. Gold, ruin, dolorous: it is not merely the sound that he
wants, but the vague associations of idea that the words give him. He
has not his eye on a particular place, as

    Li ruscelletti che dei verdi colli
    Del Casentin discendon giuso in Arno....

It is, in fact, the word that gives him the thrill, not the object. When
you take to pieces any verse of Swinburne, you find always that the
object was not thereonly the word. Compare

    Snowdrops that plead for pardon
    And pine for fright

with the daffodils that come before the swallow dares. The snowdrop of
Swinburne disappears, the daffodil of Shakespeare remains. The swallow
of Shakespeare remains in the verse in _Macbeth_; the bird of Wordsworth

    Breaking the silence of the seas

remains; the swallow of Itylus disappears. Compare, again, a chorus of
_Atalanta_ with a chorus from Athenian tragedy. The chorus of Swinburne
is almost a parody of the Athenian: it is sententious, but it has not
even the significance of commonplace.

    At least we witness of thee ere we die
    That these things are not otherwise, but thus....

    Before the beginning of years
      There came to the making of man
    Time with a gift of tears;
      Grief with a glass that ran....

This is not merely music; it is effective because it appears to be a
tremendous statement, like statements made in our dreams; when we wake
up we find that the glass that ran would do better for time than for
grief, and that the gift of tears would be as appropriately bestowed by
grief as by time.

It might seem to be intimated, by what has been said, that the work of
Swinburne can be shown to be a sham, just as bad verse is a sham. It
would only be so if you could produce or suggest something that it
pretends to be and is not. The world of Swinburne does not depend upon
some other world which it simulates; it has the necessary completeness
and self-sufficiency for justification and permanence. It is impersonal,
and no one else could have made it. The deductions are true to the
postulates. It is indestructible. None of the obvious complaints that
were or might have been brought to bear upon the first _Poems and
Ballads_ holds good. The poetry is not morbid, it is not erotic, it is
not destructive. These are adjectives which can be applied to the
material, the human feelings, which in Swinburnes case do not exist.
The morbidity is not of human feeling but of language. Language in a
healthy state presents the object, is so close to the object that the
two are identified.

They are identified in the verse of Swinburne solely because the object
has ceased to exist, because the meaning is merely the hallucination of
meaning, because language, uprooted, has adapted itself to an
independent life of atmospheric nourishment. In Swinburne, for example,
we see the word weary flourishing in this way independent of the
particular and actual weariness of flesh or spirit. The bad poet dwells
partly in a world of objects and partly in a world of words, and he
never can get them to fit. Only a man of genius could dwell so
exclusively and consistently among words as Swinburne. His language is
not, like the language of bad poetry, dead. It is very much alive, with
this singular life of its own. But the language which is more important
to us is that which is struggling to digest and express new objects, new
groups of objects, new feelings, new aspects, as, for instance, the
prose of Mr. James Joyce or the earlier Conrad.




                                 Blake


                                   I

If one follows Blakes mind through the several stages of his poetic
development it is impossible to regard him as a naf, a wild man, a wild
pet for the supercultivated. The strangeness is evaporated, the
peculiarity is seen to be the peculiarity of all great poetry: something
which is found (not everywhere) in Homer and schylus and Dante and
Villon, and profound and concealed in the work of Shakespeareand also
in another form in Montaigne and in Spinoza. It is merely a peculiar
honesty, which, in a world too frightened to be honest, is peculiarly
terrifying. It is an honesty against which the whole world conspires,
because it is unpleasant. Blakes poetry has the unpleasantness of great
poetry. Nothing that can be called morbid or abnormal or perverse, none
of the things which exemplify the sickness of an epoch or a fashion,
have this quality; only those things which, by some extraordinary labour
of simplification, exhibit the essential sickness or strength of the
human soul. And this honesty never exists without great technical
accomplishment. The question about Blake the man is the question of the
circumstances that concurred to permit this honesty in his work, and
what circumstances define its limitations. The favouring conditions
probably include these two: that, being early apprenticed to a manual
occupation, he was not compelled to acquire any other education in
literature than he wanted, or to acquire it for any other reason than
that he wanted it; and that, being a humble engraver, he had no
journalistic-social career open to him.

There was, that is to say, nothing to distract him from his interests or
to corrupt these interests: neither the ambitions of parents or wife,
nor the standards of society, nor the temptations of success; nor was he
exposed to imitation of himself or of anyone else. These
circumstancesnot his supposed inspired and untaught spontaneityare
what make him innocent. His early poems show what the poems of a boy of
genius ought to show, immense power of assimilation. Such early poems
are not, as usually supposed, crude attempts to do something beyond the
boys capacity; they are, in the case of a boy of real promise, more
likely to be quite mature and successful attempts to do something small.
So with Blake, his early poems are technically admirable, and their
originality is in an occasional rhythm. The verse of _Edward III_
deserves study. But his affection for certain Elizabethans is not so
surprising as his affinity with the very best work of his own century.
He is very like Collins, he is very eighteenth century. The poem
_Whether on Idas shady brow_ is eighteenth-century work; the movement,
the weight of it, the syntax, the choice of words

    The _languid_ strings do scarcely move!
    The sound is _forcd_, the notes are few!

this is contemporary with Gray and Collins, it is the poetry of a
language which has undergone the discipline of prose. Blake up to twenty
is decidedly a traditional.

Blakes beginnings as a poet, then, are as normal as the beginnings of
Shakespeare. His method of composition, in his mature work, is exactly
like that of other poets. He has an idea (a feeling, an image), he
develops it by accretion or expansion, alters his verse often, and
hesitates often over the final choice.[9] The idea, of course, simply
comes, but upon arrival it is subjected to prolonged manipulation. In
the first phase Blake is concerned with verbal beauty; in the second he
becomes the apparent naf, really the mature intelligence. It is only
when the ideas become more automatic, come more freely and are less
manipulated, that we begin to suspect their origin, to suspect that they
spring from a shallower source.

Footnote 9:

  I do not know why M. Berger should say, without qualification, in his
  _William Blake: mysticisme et posie_, that son respect pour lesprit
  qui soufflait en lui et qui dictait ses paroles lempchait de les
  corriger jamais. Dr. Sampson, in his Oxford edition of Blake, gives
  us to understand that Blake believed much of his writing to be
  automatic, but observes that Blakes meticulous care in composition
  is everywhere apparent in the poems preserved in rough draft ...
  alteration on alteration, rearrangement after rearrangement,
  deletions, additions, and inversions....

The Songs of Innocence and of Experience, and the poems from the
Rossetti manuscript, are the poems of a man with a profound interest in
human emotions, and a profound knowledge of them. The emotions are
presented in an extremely simplified, abstract form. This form is one
illustration of the eternal struggle of art against education, of the
literary artist against the continuous deterioration of language.

It is important that the artist should be highly educated in his own
art; but his education is one that is hindered rather than helped by the
ordinary processes of society which constitute education for the
ordinary man. For these processes consist largely in the acquisition of
impersonal ideas which obscure what we really are and feel, what we
really want, and what really excites our interest. It is of course not
the actual information acquired, but the conformity which the
accumulation of knowledge is apt to impose, that is harmful. Tennyson is
a very fair example of a poet almost wholly encrusted with parasitic
opinion, almost wholly merged into his environment. Blake, on the other
hand, knew what interested him, and he therefore presents only the
essential, only, in fact, what can be presented, and need not be
explained. And because he was not distracted, or frightened, or occupied
in anything but exact statement, he understood. He was naked, and saw
man naked, and from the centre of his own crystal. To him there was no
more reason why Swedenborg should be absurd than Locke. He accepted
Swedenborg, and eventually rejected him, for reasons of his own. He
approached everything with a mind unclouded by current opinions. There
was nothing of the superior person about him. This makes him terrifying.


                                   II

But if there was nothing to distract him from sincerity there were, on
the other hand, the dangers to which the naked man is exposed. His
philosophy, like his visions, like his insight, like his technique, was
his own. And accordingly he was inclined to attach more importance to it
than an artist should; this is what makes him eccentric, and makes him
inclined to formlessness.

    But most through midnight streets I hear
    How the youthful harlots curse
    Blasts the new-born infants tear,
    And blights with plagues the marriage hearse,

is the naked vision;

    Love seeketh only self to please,
    To bind another to its delight,
    Joys in anothers loss of ease,
    And builds a Hell in Heavens despite,

is the naked observation; and _The Marriage of Heaven and Hell_ is naked
philosophy, presented. But Blakes occasional marriages of poetry and
philosophy are not so felicitous.

    He who would do good to another must do it in Minute Particulars.
    General Good is the plea of the scoundrel, hypocrite, and flatterer;
    For Art and Science cannot exist but in minutely organized
       particulars....

One feels that the form is not well chosen. The borrowed philosophy of
Dante and Lucretius is perhaps not so interesting, but it injures their
form less. Blake did not have that more Mediterranean gift of form which
knows how to borrow as Dante borrowed his theory of the soul; he must
needs create a philosophy as well as a poetry. A similar formlessness
attacks his draughtsmanship. The fault is most evident, of course, in
the longer poemsor rather, the poems in which structure is important.
You cannot create a very large poem without introducing a more
impersonal point of view, or splitting it up into various personalities.
But the weakness of the long poems is certainly not that they are too
visionary, too remote from the world. It is that Blake did not see
enough, became too much occupied with ideas.

We have the same respect for Blakes philosophy (and perhaps for that of
Samuel Butler) that we have for an ingenious piece of home-made
furniture: we admire the man who has put it together out of the odds and
ends about the house. England has produced a fair number of these
resourceful Robinson Crusoes; but we are not really so remote from the
Continent, or from our own past, as to be deprived of the advantages of
culture if we wish them.

We may speculate, for amusement, whether it would not have been
beneficial to the north of Europe generally, and to Britain in
particular, to have had a more continuous religious history. The local
divinities of Italy were not wholly exterminated by Christianity, and
they were not reduced to the dwarfish fate which fell upon our trolls
and pixies. The latter, with the major Saxon deities, were perhaps no
great loss in themselves, but they left an empty place; and perhaps our
mythology was further impoverished by the divorce from Rome. Miltons
celestial and infernal regions are large but insufficiently furnished
apartments filled by heavy conversation; and one remarks about the
Puritan mythology an historical thinness. And about Blakes supernatural
territories, as about the supposed ideas that dwell there, we cannot
help commenting on a certain meanness of culture. They illustrate the
crankiness, the eccentricity, which frequently affects writers outside
of the Latin traditions, and which such a critic as Arnold should
certainly have rebuked. And they are not essential to Blakes
inspiration.

Blake was endowed with a capacity for considerable understanding of
human nature, with a remarkable and original sense of language and the
music of language, and a gift of hallucinated vision. Had these been
controlled by a respect for impersonal reason, for common sense, for the
objectivity of science, it would have been better for him. What his
genius required, and what it sadly lacked, was a framework of accepted
and traditional ideas which would have prevented him from indulging in a
philosophy of his own, and concentrated his attention upon the problems
of the poet. Confusion of thought, emotion, and vision is what we find
in such a work as _Also Sprach Zarathustra_; it is eminently not a Latin
virtue. The concentration resulting from a framework of mythology and
theology and philosophy is one of the reasons why Dante is a classic,
and Blake only a poet of genius. The fault is perhaps not with Blake
himself, but with the environment which failed to provide what such a
poet needed; perhaps the circumstances compelled him to fabricate,
perhaps the poet required the philosopher and mythologist; although the
conscious Blake may have been quite unconscious of the motives.




                                 Dante


M. Paul Valry, a writer for whom I have considerable respect, has
placed in his most recent statement upon poetry a paragraph which seems
to me of very doubtful validity. I have not seen the complete essay, and
know the quotation only as it appears in a critical notice in the
_Athenum_, July 23, 1920:

    La philosophie, et mme la morale tendirent  fuir les uvres pour
    se placer dans les rflexions qui les prcdent.... Parler
    aujourdhui de posie philosophique (ft-ce en invoquant Alfred de
    Vigny, Leconte de Lisle, et quelques autres), cest naivement
    confondre des conditions et des applications de lesprit
    incompatibles entre elles. Nest-ce pas oublier que le but de celui
    qui spcule est de fixer ou de crer une notioncest--dire un
    _pouvoir_ et un _instrument de pouvoir_, cependant que le pote
    moderne essaie de produire en nous un _tat_ et de porter cet tat
    exceptionnel au point dune jouissance parfaite....

It may be that I do M. Valry an injustice which I must endeavour to
repair when I have the pleasure of reading his article entire. But the
paragraph gives the impression of more than one error of analysis. In
the first place, it suggests that conditions have changed, that
philosophical poetry may once have been permissible, but that (perhaps
owing to the greater specialization of the modern world) it is now
intolerable. We are forced to assume that what we do not like in our
time was never good art, and that what appears to us good was always so.
If any ancient philosophical poetry retains its value, a value which
we fail to find in modern poetry of the same type, we investigate on the
assumption that we shall find some difference to which the mere
difference of date is irrelevant. But if it be maintained that the older
poetry has a philosophic element and a poetic element which can be
isolated, we have two tasks to perform. We must show first in a
particular caseour case is Dantethat the philosophy is essential to
the structure and that the structure is essential to the poetic beauty
of the parts; and we must show that the philosophy is employed in a
different form from that which it takes in admittedly unsuccessful
philosophical poems. And if M. Valry is in error in his complete
exorcism of philosophy, perhaps the basis of the error is his
apparently commendatory interpretation of the effort of the modern poet,
namely, that the latter endeavours to produce in us a _state_.

The early philosophical poets, Parmenides and Empedocles, were
apparently persons of an impure philosophical inspiration. Neither their
predecessors nor their successors expressed themselves in verse;
Parmenides and Empedocles were persons who mingled with genuine
philosophical ability a good deal of the emotion of the founder of a
second-rate religious system. They were not interested exclusively in
philosophy, or religion, or poetry, but in something which was a mixture
of all three; hence their reputation as poets is low and as philosophers
should be considerably below Heraclitus, Zeno, Anaxagoras, or
Democritus. The poem of Lucretius is quite a different matter. For
Lucretius was undoubtedly a poet. He endeavours to expound a
philosophical system, but with a different motive from Parmenides or
Empedocles, for this system is already in existence; he is really
endeavouring to find the concrete poetic equivalent for this systemto
find its complete equivalent in vision. Only, as he is an innovator in
this art, he wavers between philosophical poetry and philosophy. So we
find passages such as:

    But the velocity of thunderbolts is great and their stroke powerful,
    and they run through their course with a rapid descent, because the
    force when aroused first in all cases collects itself in the clouds
    and.... Let us now sing what causes the motion of the stars.... Of
    all these different smells then which strike the nostrils one may
    reach to a much greater distance than another....[10]

Footnote 10:

  Munros translation, _passim_.

But Lucretius true tendency is to express an ordered vision of the life
of man, with great vigour of real poetic image and often acute
observation.

    quod petiere, premunt arte faciuntque dolorem
    corporis et dentes inlidunt saepe labellis
    osculaque adfligunt, quia non est pura voluptas
    et stimuli subsunt qui instigant laedere id ipsum
    quodcumque est, rabies unde illaec germina surgunt....

                                      medio de fonte leporum
    surgit amari aliquid quod in ipsis floribus angat....

    nec procumbere humi prostratum et pandere palmas
    ante deum delubra nec aras sanguine multo
    spargere quadrupedum nec votis nectere vota,
    sed mage pacata posse omnia mente tueri.

The philosophy which Lucretius tackled was not rich enough in variety of
feeling, applied itself to life too uniformly, to supply the material
for a wholly successful poem. It was incapable of complete expansion
into pure vision. But I must ask M. Valry whether the aim of
Lucretius poem was to fix or create a notion or to fashion an
instrument of power.

Without doubt, the effort of the philosopher proper, the man who is
trying to deal with ideas in themselves, and the effort of the poet, who
may be trying to _realize_ ideas, cannot be carried on at the same time.
But this is not to deny that poetry can be in some sense philosophic.
The poet can deal with philosophic ideas, not as matter for argument,
but as matter for inspection. The original form of a philosophy cannot
be poetic. But poetry can be penetrated by a philosophic idea, it can
deal with this idea when it has reached the point of immediate
acceptance, when it has become almost a physical modification. If we
divorced poetry and philosophy altogether, we should bring a serious
impeachment, not only against Dante, but against most of Dantes
contemporaries.

Dante had the benefit of a mythology and a theology which had undergone
a more complete absorption into life than those of Lucretius. It is
curious that not only Dantes detractors, like the Petrarch of Landors
_Pentameron_ (if we may apply so strong a word to so amiable a
character), but some of his admirers, insist on the separation of
Dantes poetry and Dantes teaching. Sometimes the philosophy is
confused with the allegory. The philosophy is an ingredient, it is a
part of Dantes world just as it is a part of life; the allegory is the
scaffold on which the poem is built. An American writer of a little
primer of Dante, Mr. Henry Dwight Sidgwick, who desires to improve our
understanding of Dante as a spiritual leader, says:

    To Dante this literal Hell was a secondary matter; so it is to us.
    He and we are concerned with the allegory. That allegory is simple.
    Hell is the absence of God.... If the reader begins with the
    consciousness that he is reading about sin, spiritually understood,
    he never loses the thread, he is never at a loss, never slips back
    into the literal signification.

Without stopping to question Mr. Sidgwick on the difference between
literal and spiritual sin, we may affirm that his remarks are
misleading. Undoubtedly the allegory is to be taken seriously, and
certainly the _Comedy_ is in some way a moral education. The question
is to find a formula for the correspondence between the former and the
latter, to decide whether the moral value corresponds directly to the
allegory. We can easily ascertain what importance Dante assigned to
allegorical method. In the _Convivio_ we are seriously informed that

    the principal design [of the odes] is to lead men to knowledge and
    virtue, as will be seen in the progress of the truth of them;

and we are also given the familiar four interpretations of an ode:
literal, allegorical, moral, and anagogical. And so distinguished a
scholar as M. Hauvette repeats again and again the phrase didactique
dintention. We accept the allegory. Accepted, there are two usual ways
of dealing with it. One may, with Mr. Sidgwick, dwell upon its
significance for the seeker of spiritual light, or one may, with
Landor, deplore the spiritual mechanics and find the poet only in
passages where he frees himself from his divine purposes. With neither
of these points of view can we concur. Mr. Sidgwick magnifies the
preacher and prophet, and presents Dante as a superior Isaiah or
Carlyle; Landor reserves the poet, reprehends the scheme, and denounces
the politics. Some of Landors errors are more palpable than Mr.
Sidgwicks. He errs, in the first place, in judging Dante by the
standards of classical epic. Whatever the _Comedy_ is, an epic it is
not. M. Hauvette well says:

    Rechercher dans quelle mesure le pome se rapproche du genre
    classique de lpope, et dans quelle mesure il sen carte, est un
    exrcice de rhtorique entirement inutile, puisque Dante,  nen
    pas douter, na jamais eu lintention de composer une action pique
    dans les rgles.

But we must define the framework of Dantes poem from the result as well
as from the intention. The poem has not only a framework, but a form;
and even if the framework be allegorical, the form may be something
else. The examination of any episode in the _Comedy_ ought to show that
not merely the allegorical interpretation or the didactic intention, but
the emotional significance itself, cannot be isolated from the rest of
the poem. Landor appears, for instance, to have misunderstood such a
passage as the Paolo and Francesca, by failing to perceive its
relations:

    In the midst of her punishment, Francesca, when she comes to the
    tenderest part of her story, tells it with complacency and delight.

This is surely a false simplification. To have lost all recollected
delight would have been, for Francesca, either loss of humanity or
relief from damnation. The ecstasy, with the present thrill at the
remembrance of it, is a part of the torture. Francesca is neither
stupefied nor reformed; she is merely damned; and it is a part of
damnation to experience desires that we can no longer gratify. For in
Dantes Hell souls are not deadened, as they mostly are in life; they
are actually in the greatest torment of which each is capable.

    E il modo ancor moffende.

It is curious that Mr. Sidgwick, whose approbation is at the opposite
pole from Landors, should have fallen into a similar error. He says:

    In meeting [Ulysses], as in meeting Pier della Vigna and Brunetto
    Latini, the preacher and the prophet are lost in the poet.

Here, again, is a false simplification. These passages have no
digressive beauty. The case of Brunetto is parallel to that of
Francesca. The emotion of the passage resides in Brunettos excellence
in damnationso admirable a soul, and so perverse.

                      e parve de costoro
    Quegli che vince e non colui che perde.

And I think that if Mr. Sidgwick had pondered the strange words of
Ulysses,

    com altrui piacque,

he would not have said that the preacher and prophet are lost in the
poet. Preacher and prophet are odious terms; but what Mr. Sidgwick
designates by them is something which is certainly not lost in the
poet, but is part of the poet.

A variety of passages might illustrate the assertion that no emotion is
contemplated by Dante purely in and for itself. The emotion of the
person, or the emotion with which our attitude appropriately invests the
person, is never lost or diminished, is always preserved entire, but is
modified by the position assigned to the person in the eternal scheme,
is coloured by the atmosphere of that persons residence in one of the
three worlds. About none of Dantes characters is there that ambiguity
which affects Miltons Lucifer. The damned preserve any degree of beauty
or grandeur that ever rightly pertained to them, and this intensifies
and also justifies their damnation. As Jason

         Guarda quel grande che viene!
    E per dolor non par lagrima spanda,
    Quanto aspetto reale ancor ritiene!

The crime of Bertrand becomes more lurid; the vindictive Adamo acquires
greater ferocity, and the errors of Arnaut are corrected

    Poi sascose nel foco che gli affina.

If the artistic emotion presented by any episode of the _Comedy_ is
dependent upon the whole, we may proceed to inquire what the whole
scheme is. The usefulness of allegory and astronomy is obvious. A
mechanical framework, in a poem of so vast an ambit, was a necessity. As
the centre of gravity of emotions is more remote from a single human
action, or a system of purely human actions, than in drama or epic, so
the framework has to be more artificial and apparently more mechanical.
It is not essential that the allegory or the almost unintelligible
astronomy should be understoodonly that its presence should be
justified. The emotional structure within this scaffold is what must be
understoodthe structure made possible by the scaffold. This structure
is an ordered scale of human emotions. Not, necessarily, _all_ human
emotions; and in any case all the emotions are limited, and also
extended in significance by their place in the scheme.

But Dantes is the most comprehensive, and the most _ordered_
presentation of emotions that has ever been made. Dantes method of
dealing with any emotion may be contrasted, not so appositely with that
of other epic poets as with that of Shakespeare. Shakespeare takes a
character apparently controlled by a simple emotion, and analyses the
character and the emotion itself. The emotion is split up into
constituentsand perhaps destroyed in the process. The mind of
Shakespeare was one of the most _critical_ that has ever existed. Dante,
on the other hand, does not analyse the emotion so much as he exhibits
its relation to other emotions. You cannot, that is, understand the
_Inferno_ without the _Purgatorio_ and the _Paradiso_. Dante, says
Landors Petrarch, is the great master of the disgusting. That is
true, though Sophocles at least once approaches him. But a disgust like
Dantes is no hypertrophy of a single reaction: it is completed and
explained only by the last canto of the Paradiso.

    La forma universal di questo nodo
      credo chio vidi, perch pi di largo
      dicendo questo, mi sento chio godo.

The contemplation of the horrid or sordid or disgusting, by an artist,
is the necessary and negative aspect of the impulse toward the pursuit
of beauty. But not all succeed as did Dante in expressing the complete
scale from negative to positive. The negative is the more importunate.

The structure of emotions, for which the allegory is the necessary
scaffold, is complete from the most sensuous to the most intellectual
and the most spiritual. Dante gives a concrete presentation of the most
elusive:

    Pareva a me che nube ne coprisse
      lucida, spessa, solida e polita,
      quasi adamante che lo sol ferisse.

    Per entro s leterna margarita
      ne recepette, com acqua recepe
      raggio di luce, permanendo unita.

or

    Nel suo aspetto tal dentro mi fei,
      qual si fe Glauco nel gustar dell erba,
      che il fe consorto in mar degli altri dei.[11]

Footnote 11:

  See E. Pound, _The Spirit of Romance_, p. 145.

Again, in the _Purgatorio_, for instance in Canto XVI and Canto XVIII,
occur passages of pure exposition of philosophy, the philosophy of
Aristotle strained through the schools.

    Lo natural e sempre senza errore,
      ma laltro puote errar per malo obbietto,
      o per poco o per troppo di vigore....

We are not here studying the philosophy, we _see_ it, as part of the
ordered world. The aim of the poet is to state a vision, and no vision
of life can be complete which does not include the articulate
formulation of life which human minds make.

    Onde convenne legge per fren porre....

It is one of the greatest merits of Dantes poem that the vision is so
nearly complete; it is evidence of this greatness that the significance
of any single passage, of any of the passages that are selected as
poetry, is incomplete unless we ourselves apprehend the whole.

And Dante helps us to provide a criticism of M. Valrys modern poet
who attempts to produce in us a _state_. A state, in itself, is
nothing whatever.

M. Valrys account is quite in harmony with pragmatic doctrine, and
with the tendencies of such a work as William Jamess _Varieties of
Religious Experience_. The mystical experience is supposed to be
valuable because it is a pleasant state of unique intensity. But the
true mystic is not satisfied merely by feeling, he must pretend at least
that he _sees_, and the absorption into the divine is only the
necessary, if paradoxical, limit of this contemplation. The poet does
not aim to excitethat is not even a test of his successbut to set
something down; the state of the reader is merely that readers
particular mode of perceiving what the poet has caught in words. Dante,
more than any other poet, has succeeded in dealing with his philosophy,
not as a theory (in the modern and not the Greek sense of that word) or
as his own comment or reflection, but in terms of something _perceived_.
When most of our modern poets confine themselves to what they had
perceived, they produce for us, usually, only odds and ends of still
life and stage properties; but that does not imply so much that the
method of Dante is obsolete, as that our vision is perhaps comparatively
restricted.

THE TRAGICAL HISTORY OF DOCTOR FAUSTUS

By Christopher Marlowe

From The Quarto Of 1616.

Edited By The Rev. Alexander Dyce.



Comments on the preparation of the E-Text:

SQUARE BRACKETS:
The square brackets, i.e. are copied from the printed book,
without change, except that the stage directions usually do not
have closing brackets.  These have been added.

FOOTNOTES:
For this E-Text version of the book, the footnotes have been
consolidated at the end of the play.

Numbering of the footnotes has been changed, and each footnote
is given a unique identity.

CHANGES TO THE TEXT:
Character names were expanded.  For Example, FAUSTUS was FAUST;
SECOND SCHOLAR was SEC. SCHOL.

OTHER COMMENTS:
This E-Text of _Doctor Faustus_ is taken from a volume of
_The Works of Christopher Marlowe_.  That volume also contains
an earlier version of the play, based on the text of 1604,
which is available as an E-Text.  Some of the notes to the
earlier version are applicable to, and help explain, this
version.

Gary R. Young



The Tragicall History of the Life and Death of Doctor Faustus.
Written by Ch. Mar. London, Printed for John Wright, and are
to be sold at his shop without Newgate, at the signe of the
Bible, 1616, 4to.

The Tragicall History of the Life and Death of Doctor Faustus.
With new Additions.  Written by Ch. Mar.  Printed at London for
John Wright, and are to be sold at his shop without Newgate,
1624, 4to.

The Tragicall Historie of the Life and Death of Doctor Faustus.
With new Additions.  Written by Ch. Mar.  Printed at London for
John Wright, and are to be sold at his shop without Newgate,
1631, 4to.

In a few places I have amended the text of this play by means of
4to 1604.--I have made no use of the comparatively modern edition,
4to 1663.





DRAMATIS PERSONAE.

     THE POPE.
     THE EMPEROR OF GERMANY.
     RAYMOND, king of Hungary.
     DUKE OF SAXONY.
     BRUNO.
     DUKE OF VANHOLT.
     MARTINO,     |
     FREDERICK,   | gentlemen.
     BENVOLIO,    |
     FAUSTUS.
     VALDES,      | friends to FAUSTUS.
     CORNELIUS,   |
     WAGNER, servant to FAUSTUS.
     Clown.
     ROBIN.
     DICK.
     Vintner.
     Horse-courser.
     Carter.
     An Old Man.
     Scholars, Cardinals, ARCHBISHOP OF RHEIMS, Bishops, Monks,
          Friars, Soldiers, and Attendants.

     DUCHESS OF VANHOLT.
     Hostess.

     LUCIFER.
     BELZEBUB.
     MEPHISTOPHILIS.
     Good Angel.
     Evil Angel.
     The Seven Deadly Sins.
     Devils.
     Spirits in the shapes of ALEXANDER THE GREAT, of his Paramour,
          of DARIUS, and of HELEN.

     Chorus.





THE TRAGICAL HISTORY OF DOCTOR FAUSTUS

FROM THE QUARTO OF 1616.

          Enter CHORUS.

     CHORUS. Not marching in the fields of Thrasymene,
     Where Mars did mate the warlike Carthagens; [1]
     Nor sporting in the dalliance of love,
     In courts of kings where state is overturn'd;
     Nor in the pomp of proud audacious deeds,
     Intends our Muse to vaunt her [2] heavenly verse:
     Only this, gentles,--we must now perform
     The form of Faustus' fortunes, good or bad:
     And now to patient judgments we appeal,
     And speak for Faustus in his infancy.
     Now is he born of parents base of stock,
     In Germany, within a town call'd Rhodes:
     At riper years, to Wittenberg he went,
     Whereas his kinsmen chiefly brought him up.
     So much he profits in divinity,
     That shortly he was grac'd with doctor's name,
     Excelling all, and sweetly can dispute
     In th' heavenly matters of theology;
     Till swoln with cunning, of [3] a self-conceit,
     His waxen wings did mount above his reach,
     And, melting, heavens conspir'd his overthrow;
     For, falling to a devilish exercise,
     And glutted now with learning's golden gifts,
     He surfeits upon [4] cursed necromancy;
     Nothing so sweet as magic is to him,
     Which he prefers before his chiefest bliss:
     And this the man that in his study sits.
          [Exit.]

          FAUSTUS discovered in his study.

     FAUSTUS. Settle thy studies, Faustus, and begin
     To sound the depth of that thou wilt profess:
     Having commenc'd, be a divine in show,
     Yet level at the end of every art,
     And live and die in Aristotle's works.
     Sweet Analytics, 'tis thou hast ravish'd me!
     Bene disserere est finis logices.
     Is, to dispute well, logic's chiefest end?
     Affords this art no greater miracle?
     Then read no more; thou hast attain'd that end:
     A greater subject fitteth Faustus' wit:
     Bid Economy farewell, and Galen come:
     Be a physician, Faustus; heap up gold,
     And be eterniz'd for some wondrous cure:
     Summum bonum medicinoe sanitas,
     The end of physic is our body's health.
     Why, Faustus, hast thou not attain'd that end?
     Are not thy bills hung up as monuments,
     Whereby whole cities have escap'd the plague,
     And thousand [5] desperate maladies been cur'd?
     Yet art thou still but Faustus, and a man.
     Couldst thou make men to live eternally,
     Or, being dead, raise them [6] to life again,
     Then this profession were to be esteem'd.
     Physic, farewell!  Where is Justinian?

          [Reads.]
     Si una eademque res legatur [7] duobus, alter rem,
     alter valorem rei, &c.

     A petty [8] case of paltry legacies!

          [Reads.]
     Exhoereditare filium non potest pater, nisi, &c. [9]

     Such is the subject of the institute,
     And universal body of the law:
     This study fits a mercenary drudge,
     Who aims at nothing but external trash;
     Too servile and illiberal for me.
     When all is done, divinity is best:
     Jerome's Bible, Faustus; view it well.

          [Reads.]
     Stipendium peccati mors est.
                                   Ha!
                                        Stipendium, &c.

     The reward of sin is death:  that's hard.

          [Reads.]
     Si peccasse negamus, fallimur, et nulla est in nobis veritas;

     If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves, and there
     is no truth in us.  Why, then, belike we must sin, and so
     consequently die:
     Ay, we must die an everlasting death.
     What doctrine call you this, Che sera, sera,
     What will be, shall be?  Divinity, adieu!
     These metaphysics of magicians,
     And necromantic books are heavenly;
     Lines, circles, scenes, letters, and characters; [10]
     Ay, these are those that Faustus most desires.
     O, what a world of profit and delight,
     Of power, of honour, and omnipotence,
     Is promis'd to the studious artizan!
     All things that move between the quiet poles
     Shall be at my command:  emperors and kings
     Are but obeyed in their several provinces;
     But his dominion that exceeds in this,
     Stretcheth as far as doth the mind of man;
     A sound magician is a demigod:
     Here tire, my brains, to gain [11] a deity.

          Enter WAGNER.

     Wagner, commend me to my dearest friends,
     The German Valdes and Cornelius;
     Request them earnestly to visit me.

     WAGNER. I will, sir.
          [Exit.]

     FAUSTUS. Their conference will be a greater help to me
     Than all my labours, plod I ne'er so fast.

          Enter GOOD ANGEL and EVIL ANGEL.

     GOOD ANGEL. O, Faustus, lay that damned book aside,
     And gaze not on it, lest it tempt thy soul,
     And heap God's heavy wrath upon thy head!
     Read, read the Scriptures:--that is blasphemy.

     EVIL ANGEL. Go forward, Faustus, in that famous art
     Wherein all Nature's treasure is contain'd:
     Be thou on earth as Jove is in the sky,
     Lord and commander of these [12] elements.
          [Exeunt ANGELS.]

     FAUSTUS. How am I glutted with conceit of this!
     Shall I make spirits fetch me what I please,
     Resolve me of all ambiguities,
     Perform what desperate enterprise [13] I will?
     I'll have them fly to India for gold,
     Ransack the ocean for orient pearl,
     And search all corners of the new-found world
     For pleasant fruits and princely delicates;
     I'll have them read me strange philosophy,
     And tell the secrets of all foreign kings;
     I'll have them wall all Germany with brass,
     And make swift Rhine circle fair [14] Wertenberg;
     I'll have them fill the public schools with silk, [15]
     Wherewith the students shall be bravely clad;
     I'll levy soldiers with the coin they bring,
     And chase the Prince of Parma from our land,
     And reign sole king of all the provinces;
     Yea, stranger engines for the brunt of war,
     Than was the fiery keel at Antwerp-bridge,
     I'll make my servile spirits to invent.

          Enter VALDES and CORNELIUS.

     Come, German Valdes, and Cornelius,
     And make me blest [16] with your sage conference.
     Valdes, sweet Valdes, and Cornelius,
     Know that your words have won me at the last
     To practice magic and concealed arts.
     Philosophy is odious and obscure;
     Both law and physic are for petty wits:
     'Tis magic, magic that hath ravish'd me.
     Then, gentle friends, aid me in this attempt;
     And I, that have with subtle syllogisms
     Gravell'd the pastors of the German church,
     And made the flowering pride of Wittenberg
     Swarm [17] to my problems, as th' infernal spirits
     On sweet Musaeus when he came to hell,
     Will be as cunning as Agrippa was,
     Whose shadow made all Europe honour him.

     VALDES. Faustus, these books, thy wit, and our experience,
     Shall make all nations to [18] canonize us.
     As Indian Moors obey their Spanish lords,
     So shall the spirits of every element
     Be always serviceable to us three;
     Like lions shall they guard us when we please;
     Like Almain rutters with their horsemen's staves,
     Or Lapland giants, trotting by our sides;
     Sometimes like women, or unwedded maids,
     Shadowing more beauty in their airy brows
     Than have [19] the white breasts of the queen of love:
     From Venice shall they [20] drag huge [21] argosies,
     And from America the golden fleece
     That yearly stuffs [22] old Philip's treasury;
     If learned Faustus will be resolute.

     FAUSTUS. Valdes, as resolute am I in this
     As thou to live:  therefore object it not.

     CORNELIUS. The miracles that magic will perform
     Will make thee vow to study nothing else.
     He that is grounded in astrology,
     Enrich'd with tongues, well seen in minerals,
     Hath all the principles magic doth require:
     Then doubt not, Faustus, but to be renowm'd, [23]
     And more frequented for this mystery
     Than heretofore the Delphian oracle.
     The spirits tell me they can dry the sea,
     And fetch the treasure of all foreign wrecks,
     Yea, all the wealth that our forefathers hid
     Within the massy entrails of the earth:
     Then tell me, Faustus, what shall we three want?

     FAUSTUS. Nothing, Cornelius.  O, this cheers my soul!
     Come, shew me some demonstrations magical,
     That I may conjure in some bushy grove,
     And have these joys in full possession.

     VALDES. Then haste thee to some solitary grove,
     And bear wise Bacon's and Albertus' [24] works,
     The Hebrew Psalter, and New Testament;
     And whatsoever else is requisite
     We will inform thee ere our conference cease.

     CORNELIUS. Valdes, first let him know the words of art;
     And then, all other ceremonies learn'd,
     Faustus may try his cunning by himself.

     VALDES. First I'll instruct thee in the rudiments,
     And then wilt thou be perfecter than I.

     FAUSTUS. Then come and dine with me, and, after meat,
     We'll canvass every quiddity thereof;
     For, ere I sleep, I'll try what I can do:
     This night I'll conjure, though I die therefore.
          [Exeunt.]

          Enter two SCHOLARS.

     FIRST SCHOLAR. I wonder what's become of Faustus, that was wont
     to make our schools ring with sic probo.

     SECOND SCHOLAR. That shall we presently know; here comes his boy.

          Enter WAGNER.

     FIRST SCHOLAR. How now, sirrah! where's thy master?

     WAGNER. God in heaven knows.

     SECOND SCHOLAR. Why, dost not thou know, then?

     WAGNER. Yes, I know; but that follows not.

     FIRST SCHOLAR. Go to, sirrah! leave your jesting, and tell us
     where he is.

     WAGNER. That follows not by force of argument, which you, being
     licentiates, should stand upon:  therefore acknowledge your
     error, and be attentive.

     SECOND SCHOLAR. Then you will not tell us?

     WAGNER. You are deceived, for I will tell you:  yet, if you were
     not dunces, you would never ask me such a question; for is he not
     corpus naturale? and is not that mobile? then wherefore should
     you ask me such a question?  But that I am by nature phlegmatic,
     slow to wrath, and prone to lechery (to love, I would say), it
     were not for you to come within forty foot of the place of
     execution, although I do not doubt but to see you both hanged
     the next sessions.  Thus having triumphed over you, I will set
     my countenance like a precisian, and begin to speak thus:--
     Truly, my dear brethren, my master is within at dinner, with
     Valdes and Cornelius, as this wine, if it could speak, would
     inform your worships:  and so, the Lord bless you, preserve you,
     and keep you, my dear brethren!
          [Exit.]

     FIRST SCHOLAR. O Faustus!
     Then I fear that which I have long suspected,
     That thou art fall'n into that [25] damned art
     For which they two are infamous through the world.

     SECOND SCHOLAR. Were he a stranger, not allied to me,
     The danger of his soul would make me mourn.
     But, come, let us go and inform the Rector:
     It may be his grave counsel may reclaim him. [26]

     FIRST SCHOLAR. I fear me nothing will reclaim him now.

     SECOND SCHOLAR. Yet let us see what we can do.
          [Exeunt.]

          Enter FAUSTUS. [27]

     FAUSTUS. Now that the gloomy shadow of the night,
     Longing to view Orion's drizzling look,
     Leaps from th' antartic world unto the sky,
     And dims the welkin with her [28] pitchy breath,
     Faustus, begin thine incantations,
     And try if devils will obey thy hest,
     Seeing thou hast pray'd and sacrific'd to them.
     Within this circle is Jehovah's name,
     Forward and backward anagrammatiz'd,
     Th' abbreviated names of holy saints,
     Figures of every adjunct to the heavens,
     And characters of signs and erring [29] stars,
     By which the spirits are enforc'd to rise:
     Then fear not, Faustus, to be resolute,
     And try the utmost magic can perform.
          [Thunder.]
     Sint mihi dii Acherontis propitii!  Valeat numen triplex Jehovoe!
     Ignei, aerii, aquatani spiritus, salvete!  Orientis princeps
     Belzebub, inferni ardentis monarcha, et Demogorgon, propitiamus
     vos, ut appareat et surgat Mephistophilis Dragon, quod tumeraris: [30]
     per Jehovam, Gehennam, et consecratam aquam quam nunc spargo,
     signumque crucis quod nunc facio, et per vota nostra, ipse nunc
     surgat nobis dicatus [31] Mephistophilis!

          Enter MEPHISTOPHILIS.

     I charge thee to return, and change thy shape;
     Thou art too ugly to attend on me:
     Go, and return an old Franciscan friar;
     That holy shape becomes a devil best.
          [Exit MEPHISTOPHILIS.]

     I see there's virtue in my heavenly words.
     Who would not be proficient in this art?
     How pliant is this Mephistophilis,
     Full of obedience and humility!
     Such is the force of magic and my spells.

          Re-enter MEPHISTOPHILIS like a Franciscan friar.

     MEPHIST. Now, Faustus, what wouldst thou have me do?

     FAUSTUS. I charge thee wait upon me whilst I live,
     To do whatever Faustus shall command,
     Be it to make the moon drop from her sphere,
     Or the ocean to overwhelm the world.

     MEPHIST. I am a servant to great Lucifer,
     And may not follow thee without his leave:
     No more than he commands must we perform.

     FAUSTUS. Did not he charge thee to appear to me?

     MEPHIST. No, I came hither [32] of mine own accord.

     FAUSTUS. Did not my conjuring speeches [33] raise thee? speak!

     MEPHIST. That was the cause, but yet per accidens; [34]
     For, when we hear one rack the name of God,
     Abjure the Scriptures and his Saviour Christ,
     We fly, in hope to get his glorious soul;
     Nor will we come, unless he use such means
     Whereby he is in danger to be damn'd.
     Therefore the shortest cut for conjuring
     Is stoutly to abjure all godliness,
     And pray devoutly to the prince of hell.

     FAUSTUS. So Faustus hath
     Already done; and holds this principle,
     There is no chief but only Belzebub;
     To whom Faustus doth dedicate himself.
     This word "damnation" terrifies not me,
     For I confound hell in Elysium:
     My ghost be with the old philosophers!
     But, leaving these vain trifles of men's souls,
     Tell me what is that Lucifer thy lord?

     MEPHIST. Arch-regent and commander of all spirits.

     FAUSTUS. Was not that Lucifer an angel once?

     MEPHIST. Yes, Faustus, and most dearly lov'd of God.

     FAUSTUS. How comes it, then, that he is prince of devils?

     MEPHIST. O, by aspiring pride and insolence;
     For which God threw him from the face of heaven.

     FAUSTUS. And what are you that live with Lucifer?

     MEPHIST. Unhappy spirits that fell [35] with Lucifer,
     Conspir'd against our God with Lucifer,
     And are for ever damn'd with Lucifer.

     FAUSTUS. Where are you damn'd?

     MEPHIST. In hell.

     FAUSTUS. How comes it, then, that thou art out of hell?

     MEPHIST. Why, this is hell, nor am I out of it:
     Think'st thou that I, that saw the face of God,
     And tasted the eternal joys of heaven,
     Am not tormented with ten thousand hells,
     In being depriv'd of everlasting bliss?
     O, Faustus, leave these frivolous demands,
     Which strike [36] a terror to my fainting soul!

     FAUSTUS. What, is great Mephistophilis so passionate
     For being deprived of the joys of heaven?
     Learn thou of Faustus manly fortitude,
     And scorn those joys thou never shalt possess.
     Go bear these tidings to great Lucifer:
     Seeing Faustus hath incurr'd eternal death
     By desperate thoughts against Jove's deity,
     Say, he surrenders up to him his soul,
     So he will spare him four and twenty years,
     Letting him live in all voluptuousness;
     Having thee ever to attend on me,
     To give me whatsoever I shall ask,
     To tell me whatsoever I demand,
     To slay mine enemies, and to aid my friends,
     And always be obedient to my will.
     Go, and return to mighty Lucifer,
     And meet me in my study at midnight,
     And then resolve me of thy master's mind.

     MEPHIST. I will, Faustus.
          [Exit.]

     FAUSTUS. Had I as many souls as there be stars,
     I'd give them all for Mephistophilis.
     By him I'll be great emperor of the world,
     And make a bridge thorough [37] the moving air,
     To pass the ocean with a band of men;
     I'll join the hills that bind the Afric shore,
     And make that country continent to Spain,
     And both contributary to my crown:
     The Emperor shall not live but by my leave,
     Nor any potentate of Germany.
     Now that I have obtain'd what I desir'd,
     I'll live in speculation of this art,
     Till Mephistophilis return again.
          [Exit.]

          Enter WAGNER and CLOWN.

     WAGNER. Come hither, sirrah boy.

     CLOWN. Boy!  O, disgrace to my person! zounds, boy in your face!
     You have seen many boys with beards, I am sure.

     WAGNER. Sirrah, [38] hast thou no comings in?

     CLOWN. Yes, and goings out too, you may see, sir.

     WAGNER. Alas, poor slave! see how poverty jests in his nakedness!
     I know the villain's out of service, and so hungry, that I know
     he would give his soul to the devil for a shoulder of mutton,
     though it were blood-raw.

     CLOWN. Not so neither:  I had need to have it well roasted, and
     good sauce to it, if I pay so dear, I can tell you.

     WAGNER. Sirrah, wilt thou be my man, and wait on me, and I will
     make thee go like Qui mihi discipulus?

     CLOWN. What, in verse?

     WAGNER. No, slave; in beaten silk and staves-acre.

     CLOWN. Staves-acre! that's good to kill vermin:  then, belike,
     if I serve you, I shall be lousy.

     WAGNER. Why, so thou shalt be, whether thou dost it or no; for,
     sirrah, if thou dost not presently bind thyself to me for seven
     years, I'll turn all the lice about thee into familiars, and make
     them tear thee in pieces.

     CLOWN. Nay, sir, you may save [39] yourself a labour, for they
     are as familiar with me as if they paid for their meat and drink,
     I can tell you.

     WAGNER. Well, sirrah, leave your jesting, and take these guilders.
          [Gives money.]

     CLOWN. Yes, marry, sir; and I thank you too.

     WAGNER. So, now thou art to be at an hour's warning, whensoever
     and wheresoever the devil shall fetch thee.

     CLOWN. Here, take your guilders again; [40] I'll none of 'em.

     WAGNER. Not I; thou art pressed:  prepare thyself, or [41] I will
     presently raise up two devils to carry thee away.--Banio!  Belcher!

     CLOWN. Belcher! an Belcher come here, I'll belch him:  I am not
     afraid of a devil.

          Enter two DEVILS.

     WAGNER. How now, sir! will you serve me now?

     CLOWN. Ay, good Wagner; take away the devil[s], then.

     WAGNER. Spirits, away!
          [Exeunt DEVILS.]
     Now, sirrah, follow me.

     CLOWN. I will, sir:  but hark you, master; will you teach me this
     conjuring occupation?

     WAGNER. Ay, sirrah, I'll teach thee to turn thyself to a dog,
     or a cat, or a mouse, or a rat, or any thing.

     CLOWN. A dog, or a cat, or a mouse, or a rat!
     O, brave, Wagner!

     WAGNER. Villain, call me Master Wagner, and see that you walk
     attentively, and let your right eye be always diametrally fixed
     upon my left heel, that thou mayst quasi vestigiis nostris [42]
     insistere.

     CLOWN. Well, sir, I warrant you.
          [Exeunt.]

          FAUSTUS discovered in his study.

     FAUSTUS. Now, Faustus,
     Must thou needs be damn'd, canst thou not be sav'd.
     What boots it, then, to think on God or heaven?
     Away with such vain fancies, and despair;
     Despair in God, and trust in Belzebub:
     Now, go not backward, [43] Faustus; be resolute:
     Why [44] waver'st thou?  O, something soundeth in mine ear,
     "Abjure this magic, turn to God again!"
     Why, he loves thee not;
     The god thou serv'st is thine own appetite,
     Wherein is fix'd the love of Belzebub:
     To him I'll build an altar and a church,
     And offer lukewarm blood of new-born babes.

          Enter GOOD ANGEL and EVIL ANGEL.

     EVIL ANGEL. Go forward, Faustus, in that famous [45] art.

     GOOD ANGEL. Sweet Faustus, leave that execrable art.

     FAUSTUS. Contrition, prayer, repentance--what of [46] these?

     GOOD ANGEL. O, they are means to bring thee unto heaven!

     EVIL ANGEL. Rather illusions, fruits of lunacy,
     That make men [47] foolish that do use them most.

     GOOD ANGEL. Sweet Faustus, think of heaven and heavenly things.

     EVIL ANGEL. No, Faustus; think of honour and of wealth.
          [Exeunt ANGELS.]

     FAUSTUS. Wealth!
     Why, the signiory of Embden shall be mine.
     When Mephistophilis shall stand by me,
     What power can hurt me?  Faustus, thou art safe:
     Cast no more doubts.--Mephistophilis, come,
     And bring glad tidings from great Lucifer;--
     Is't not midnight?--come Mephistophilis,
     And bring glad tidings from great Lucifer;--
     Is't not midnight?--come Mephistophilis,
     Veni, veni, Mephistophile! [48]

          Enter MEPHISTOPHILIS.

     Now tell me what saith Lucifer, thy lord?

     MEPHIST. That I shall wait on Faustus whilst he lives,
     So he will buy my service with his soul.

     FAUSTUS. Already Faustus hath hazarded that for thee.

     MEPHIST. But now thou must bequeath it solemnly,
     And write a deed of gift with thine own blood;
     For that security craves Lucifer.
     If thou deny it, I must back to hell.

     FAUSTUS. Stay, Mephistophilis, and tell me, what good will my
     soul do thy lord?

     MEPHIST. Enlarge his kingdom.

     FAUSTUS. Is that the reason why he tempts us thus?

     MEPHIST. Solamen miseris socios habuisse doloris.

     FAUSTUS. Why, have you any pain that torture others?

     MEPHIST. As great as have the human souls of men.
     But, tell me, Faustus, shall I have thy soul?
     And I will be thy slave, and wait on thee,
     And give thee more than thou hast wit to ask.

     FAUSTUS. Ay, Mephistophilis, I'll give it thee. [49]

     MEPHIST. Then, Faustus, stab thine [50] arm courageously,
     And bind thy soul, that at some certain day
     Great Lucifer may claim it as his own;
     And [51] then be thou as great as Lucifer.

     FAUSTUS. [Stabbing his arm] Lo, Mephistophilis, for love of thee,
     Faustus hath cut his arm, and with his proper blood
     Assures his soul to be great Lucifer's,
     Chief lord and regent of perpetual night!
     View here this blood that trickles from mine arm,
     And let it be propitious for my [52] wish.

     MEPHIST. But, Faustus,
     Write it in manner of a deed of gift.

     FAUSTUS. [Writing] Ay, so I do.  But, Mephistophilis,
     My blood congeals, and I can write no more.

     MEPHIST. I'll fetch thee fire to dissolve it straight.
          [Exit.]

     FAUSTUS. What might the staying of my blood portend?
     Is it [53] unwilling I should write this bill?
     Why streams it not, that I may write afresh?
     FAUSTUS GIVES TO THEE HIS SOUL:  O, there it stay'd!
     Why shouldst thou not? is not thy soul thine own?
     Then write again, FAUSTUS GIVES TO THEE HIS SOUL. [54]

          Re-enter MEPHISTOPHILIS with the chafer of fire.

     MEPHIST. See, Faustus, here is fire; set it on.

     FAUSTUS. So, now the blood begins to clear again;
     Now will I make an [55] end immediately.
          [Writes.]

     MEPHIST. What will not I do to obtain his soul?
          [Aside.]

     FAUSTUS. Consummatum est; this bill is ended,
     And Faustus hath bequeath'd his soul to Lucifer.
     But what is this inscription on mine arm?
     Homo, fuge:  whither should [56] I fly?
     If unto God, [57] he'll throw me down to hell.
     My senses are deceiv'd; here's nothing writ:--
     O, yes, I see it plain; even here is writ,
     Homo, fuge:  yet shall not Faustus fly.

     MEPHIST. I'll fetch him somewhat to delight his mind.
          [Aside, and then exit.]

          Enter DEVILS, giving crowns and rich apparel to FAUSTUS.
          They dance, and then depart.

          Re-enter MEPHISTOPHILIS.

     FAUSTUS. What means this show? speak, Mephistophilis.

     MEPHIST. Nothing, Faustus, but to delight thy mind,
     And let thee see what magic can perform.

     FAUSTUS. But may I raise such spirits when I please?

     MEPHIST. Ay, Faustus, and do greater things than these.

     FAUSTUS. Then, Mephistophilis, receive this scroll, [58]
     A deed of gift of body and of soul:
     But yet conditionally that thou perform
     All covenants and articles between us both!

     MEPHIST. Faustus, I swear by hell and Lucifer
     To effect all promises between us both!

     FAUSTUS. Then hear me read it, Mephistophilis.
          [Reads.]
     ON THESE CONDITIONS FOLLOWING.  FIRST, THAT FAUSTUS MAY BE A
     SPIRIT IN FORM AND SUBSTANCE.  SECONDLY, THAT MEPHISTOPHILIS
     SHALL BE HIS SERVANT, AND BE BY HIM COMMANDED.  THIRDLY, THAT
     MEPHISTOPHILIS SHALL DO FOR HIM, AND BRING HIM WHATSOEVER HE
     DESIRES. [59]  FOURTHLY, THAT HE SHALL BE IN HIS CHAMBER OR HOUSE
     INVISIBLE.  LASTLY, THAT HE SHALL APPEAR TO THE SAID JOHN FAUSTUS,
     AT ALL TIMES, IN WHAT SHAPE AND FORM SOEVER HE PLEASE.  I, JOHN
     FAUSTUS, OF WITTENBERG, DOCTOR, BY THESE PRESENTS, DO GIVE BOTH
     BODY AND SOUL TO LUCIFER PRINCE OF THE EAST, AND HIS MINISTER
     MEPHISTOPHILIS; AND FURTHERMORE GRANT UNTO THEM, THAT, FOUR-AND-
     TWENTY YEARS BEING EXPIRED, AND THESE ARTICLES ABOVE-WRITTEN
     BEING INVIOLATE, FULL POWER TO FETCH OR CARRY THE SAID JOHN FAUSTUS,
     BODY AND SOUL, FLESH AND [60] BLOOD, INTO THEIR HABITATION WHERESOEVER.
     BY ME, JOHN FAUSTUS.

     MEPHIST. Speak, Faustus, do you deliver this as your deed?

     FAUSTUS. Ay, take it, and the devil give thee good of it!

     MEPHIST. So, now, Faustus, ask me what thou wilt.

     FAUSTUS. First I will question with [61] thee about hell.
     Tell me, where is the [62] place that men call hell?

     MEPHIST. Under the heavens.

     FAUSTUS. Ay, so are all things else; but whereabouts?

     MEPHIST. Within the bowels of these elements,
     Where we are tortur'd and remain for ever:
     Hell hath no limits, nor is circumscrib'd
     In one self-place; but where we are is hell,
     And where hell is, there must we ever be:
     And, to be short, when all the world dissolves,
     And every creature shall be purified,
     All places shall be hell that are [63] not heaven.

     FAUSTUS. I think hell's a fable. [64]

     MEPHIST. Ay, think so still, till experience change thy mind.

     FAUSTUS. Why, dost thou think that Faustus shall be damn'd?

     MEPHIST. Ay, of necessity, for here's the scroll
     In which thou hast given thy soul to Lucifer.

     FAUSTUS. Ay, and body too; and what of that?
     Think'st thou that Faustus is so fond to imagine
     That, after this life, there is any pain?
     No, these are trifles and mere old wives' tales.

     MEPHIST. But I am an instance to prove the contrary,
     For I tell thee I am damn'd and now in hell.

     FAUSTUS. Nay, an this be hell, I'll willingly be damn'd:
     What! sleeping, eating, walking, and disputing!
     But, leaving this, let me have a wife,
     The fairest maid in Germany;
     For I am wanton and lascivious,
     And cannot live without a wife.

     MEPHIST. Well, Faustus, thou shalt have a wife.

          [MEPHISTOPHILIS fetches in a WOMAN-DEVIL.]

     FAUSTUS. What sight is this?

     MEPHIST. Now, Faustus, wilt thou have a wife?

     FAUSTUS. Here's a hot whore, indeed:  no, I'll no wife.

     MEPHIST. Marriage is but a ceremonial toy,
     And, if thou lov'st me, think no more of it.
     I'll cull thee out the fairest courtezans,
     And bring them every morning to thy bed:
     She whom thine [65] eye shall like, thy [66] heart shall have,
     Were she as chaste as was [67] Penelope,
     As wise as Saba, or as beautiful
     As was bright Lucifer before his fall.
     Here, take this book, peruse it well:
     The iterating of these lines brings gold;
     The framing of this circle on the ground
     Brings thunder, whirlwinds, storm, and lightning;
     Pronounce this thrice devoutly to thyself,
     And men in harness [68] shall appear to thee,
     Ready to execute what thou command'st.

     FAUSTUS. Thanks, Mephistophilis, for this sweet book:
     This will I keep as chary as my life.
          [Exeunt.]

          Enter FAUSTUS, in his study, and MEPHISTOPHILIS.

     FAUSTUS. When I behold the heavens, [69] then I repent,
     And curse thee, wicked Mephistophilis,
     Because thou hast depriv'd me of those joys.

     MEPHIST. 'Twas thine [70] own seeking, Faustus; thank thyself.
     But, think'st thou heaven is [71] such a glorious thing?
     I tell thee, Faustus, it is not half so fair
     As thou, or any man that breathes [72] on earth.

     FAUSTUS. How prov'st thou that?

     MEPHIST. 'Twas made for man; then he's more excellent.

     FAUSTUS. If heaven was made for man, 'twas made for me:
     I will renounce this magic and repent.

          Enter GOOD ANGEL and EVIL ANGEL.

     GOOD ANGEL. Faustus, repent; yet God will pity thee.

     EVIL ANGEL. Thou art a spirit; God cannot pity thee.

     FAUSTUS. Who buzzeth in mine ears [73] I am a spirit?
     Be I a devil, yet God may pity me;
     Yea, God will pity me, if I repent.

     EVIL ANGEL. Ay, but Faustus never shall repent.
          [Exeunt ANGELS.]

     FAUSTUS. My heart is harden'd, I cannot repent;
     Scarce can I name salvation, faith, or heaven:
     Swords, poisons, halters, and envenom'd steel
     Are laid before me to despatch myself;
     And long ere this I [74] should have done the deed,
     Had not sweet pleasure conquer'd deep despair.
     Have not I made blind Homer sing to me
     Of Alexander's love and Oenon's death?
     And hath not he, that built the walls of Thebes
     With ravishing sound of his melodious harp,
     Made music with my Mephistophilis?
     Why should I die, then, or basely despair?
     I am resolv'd; Faustus shall not repent.--
     Come, Mephistophilis, let us dispute again,
     And reason of divine astrology.
     Speak, are there many spheres above the moon?
     Are all celestial bodies but one globe,
     As is the substance of this centric earth?

     MEPHIST. As are the elements, such are the heavens,
     Even from the moon unto th' empyreal orb,
     Mutually folded in each other's spheres,
     And jointly move upon one axletree,
     Whose termine [75] is term'd the world's wide pole;
     Nor are the names of Saturn, Mars, or Jupiter
     Feign'd, but are erring [76] stars.

     FAUSTUS. But have they all one motion, both situ et tempore?

     MEPHIST. All move from east to west in four-and-twenty
     hours upon the poles of the world; but differ in their motions
     upon the poles of the zodiac.

     FAUSTUS. These slender questions Wagner can decide:
     Hath Mephistophilis no greater skill?
     Who knows not the double motion [77] of the planets?
     That the first is finish'd in a natural day;
     The second thus; Saturn in thirty years; Jupiter in twelve;
     Mars in four; the Sun, Venus, and Mercury in a year; the Moon
     in twenty-eight days.  These are freshmen's questions.  But
     tell me, hath every sphere a dominion or intelligentia?

     MEPHIST. Ay.

     FAUSTUS. How many heavens or spheres are there?

     MEPHIST. Nine; the seven planets, the firmament, and the empyreal
     heaven.

     FAUSTUS. But is there not coelum igneum et crystallinum?

     MEPHIST. No, Faustus, they be but fables.

     FAUSTUS. Resolve me, then, in this one question; why are not
     conjunctions, oppositions, aspects, eclipses, all at one time,
     but in some years we have more, in some less?

     MEPHIST. Per inoequalem motum respectu totius.

     FAUSTUS. Well, I am answered.  Now tell me who made the world?

     MEPHIST. I will not.

     FAUSTUS. Sweet Mephistophilis, tell me.

     MEPHIST. Move me not, Faustus.

     FAUSTUS. Villain, have I not bound thee to tell me any thing?

     MEPHIST. Ay, [78] that is not against our kingdom; this is.
     Thou art damned; think thou of hell.

     FAUSTUS. Think, Faustus, upon God that made the world.

     MEPHIST. Remember this.
          [Exit.]

     FAUSTUS. Ay, go, accursed spirit, to ugly hell!
     'Tis thou hast damn'd distressed Faustus' soul.
     Is't not too late?

          Re-enter GOOD ANGEL and EVIL ANGEL.

     EVIL ANGEL. Too late.

     GOOD ANGEL. Never too late, if Faustus will repent.

     EVIL ANGEL. If thou repent, devils will tear thee in pieces.

     GOOD ANGEL. Repent, and they shall never raze thy skin.
          [Exeunt ANGELS.]

     FAUSTUS. O Christ, my Saviour, my Saviour
     Help to save distressed Faustus' soul!

          Enter LUCIFER, BELZEBUB, and MEPHISTOPHILIS.

     LUCIFER. Christ cannot save thy soul, for he is just:
     There's none but I have interest in the same.

     FAUSTUS. O, what art thou that look'st so terribly?

     LUCIFER. I am Lucifer,
     And this is my companion-prince in hell.

     FAUSTUS. O Faustus, they are come to fetch thy soul!

     BELZEBUB. We are come to tell thee thou dost injure us.

     LUCIFER. Thou call'st of Christ, contrary to thy promise.

     BELZEBUB. Thou shouldst not think on God.

     LUCIFER. Think of the devil.

     BELZEBUB. And his dam too.

     FAUSTUS. Nor will Faustus henceforth:  pardon him for this,
     And Faustus vows never to look to heaven.

     LUCIFER. So shalt thou shew thyself an obedient servant,
     And we will highly gratify thee for it.

     BELZEBUB. Faustus, we are come from hell in person to shew thee
     some pastime:  sit down, and thou shalt behold the Seven Deadly
     Sins appear to thee in their own proper shapes and likeness.

     FAUSTUS. That sight will be as pleasant unto me,
     As Paradise was to Adam the first day
     Of his creation.

     LUCIFER. Talk not of Paradise or creation; but mark the show.--
     Go, Mephistophilis, and [79] fetch them in.

          MEPHISTOPHILIS brings in the SEVEN DEADLY SINS.

     BELZEBUB. Now, Faustus, question them of their names and
     dispositions.

     FAUSTUS. That shall I soon.--What art thou, the [80] first?

     PRIDE. I am Pride.  I disdain to have any parents.  I am like to
     Ovid's flea; I can creep into every corner of a wench; sometimes,
     like a perriwig, I sit upon her brow; next, like a necklace, I hang
     about her neck; then, like a fan of feathers, I kiss her lips; [81]
     and then, turning myself to a wrought smock, do what I list.
     But, fie, what a smell is here!  I'll not speak a word more for
     a king's ransom, unless the ground be perfumed, and covered with
     cloth of arras.

     FAUSTUS. Thou art a proud knave, indeed.--What art thou, the second?

     COVETOUSNESS. I am Covetousness, begotten of an old churl, in a
     leather bag:  and, might I now obtain my wish, this house, you,
     and all, should turn to gold, that I might lock you safe into
     my chest:  O my sweet gold!

     FAUSTUS. And what art thou, the third?

     ENVY. I am Envy, begotten of a chimney-sweeper and an oyster-wife.
     I cannot read, and therefore wish all books burned.  I am lean
     with seeing others eat.  O, that there would come a famine over
     all the world, that all might die, and I live alone! then thou
     shouldst see how fat I'd be.  But must thou sit, and I stand?
     come down, with a vengeance!

     FAUSTUS. Out, envious wretch!--But what art thou, the fourth?

     WRATH. I am Wrath.  I had neither father nor mother:  I leapt
     out of a lion's mouth when I was scarce an hour old; and ever
     since have run [82] up and down the world with this [83] case of
     rapiers, wounding myself when I could get none to fight withal.
     I was born in hell; and look to it, for some of you shall be my
     father.

     FAUSTUS. And what art thou, the fifth?

     GLUTTONY. I am Gluttony.  My parents are all dead, and the devil
     a penny they have left me, but a small pension, and that buys me
     thirty meals a-day and ten bevers,--a small trifle to suffice
     nature.  I come [84] of a royal pedigree:  my father was a Gammon
     of Bacon, my mother was a Hogshead of Claret-wine; my godfathers
     were these, Peter Pickled-herring and Martin Martlemas-beef; but
     my godmother, O, she was an ancient gentlewoman; her name was
     Margery March-beer.  Now, Faustus, thou hast heard all my progeny;
     wilt thou bid me to supper?

     FAUSTUS. Not I.

     GLUTTONY. Then the devil choke thee!

     FAUSTUS. Choke thyself, glutton!--What art thou, the sixth?

     SLOTH. Heigho!  I am Sloth.  I was begotten on a sunny bank.
     Heigho!  I'll not speak a word more for a king's ransom.

     FAUSTUS. And what are you, Mistress Minx, the seventh and last?

     LECHERY. Who, I, [85] sir?  I am one that loves an inch of raw
     mutton better than an ell of fried stock-fish; and the first
     letter of my name begins with L. [86]

     LUCIFER. Away to hell, away!  On, piper!
          [Exeunt the SINS.]

     FAUSTUS. O, how this sight doth delight my soul!

     LUCIFER. Tut, [87] Faustus, in hell is all manner of delight.

     FAUSTUS. O, might I see hell, and return again safe,
     How happy were I then!

     LUCIFER. Faustus, thou shalt; at midnight I will send for thee.
     Meanwhile peruse this book and view it throughly,
     And thou shalt turn thyself into what shape thou wilt.

     FAUSTUS. Thanks, mighty Lucifer!
     This will I keep as chary as my life.

     LUCIFER. Now, Faustus, farewell.

     FAUSTUS. Farewell, great Lucifer.
          [Exeunt LUCIFER and BELZEBUB.]

     Come, Mephistophilis.
          [Exeunt.]

          Enter ROBIN, [88] with a book.

     ROBIN. What, Dick! look to the horses there, till I come again.
     I have gotten one of Doctor Faustus' conjuring-books; and now
     we'll have such knavery as't passes.

          Enter DICK.

     DICK. What, Robin! you must come away and walk the horses.

     ROBIN. I walk the horses!  I scorn't, faith: [89]  I have other
     matters in hand:  let the horses walk themselves, an they will.--
          [Reads.]
     A per se, a; t, h, e, the; o per se, o; Demy orgon gorgon.--
     Keep further from me, O thou illiterate and unlearned hostler!

     DICK. 'Snails, what hast thou got there? a book! why, thou canst
     not tell [90] ne'er a word on't.

     ROBIN. That thou shalt see presently:  keep out of the circle,
     I say, lest I send you into the ostry with a vengeance.

     DICK. That's like, faith! you had best leave your foolery; for,
     an my master come, he'll conjure you, faith.

     ROBIN. My master conjure me!  I'll tell thee what; an my master
     come here, I'll clap as fair a [91] pair of horns on's head as
     e'er thou sawest in thy life.

     DICK. Thou need'st [92] not do that, for my mistress hath done it.

     ROBIN. Ay, there be of us here that have waded as deep into
     matters as other men, if they were disposed to talk.

     DICK. A plague take you!  I thought you did not sneak up and down
     after her for nothing.  But, I prithee, tell me in good sadness,
     Robin, is that a conjuring-book?

     ROBIN. Do but speak what thou'lt have me to do, and I'll do't:
     if thou'lt dance naked, put off thy clothes, and I'll conjure
     thee about presently; or, if thou'lt go but to the tavern with
     me, I'll give thee white wine, red wine, claret-wine, sack,
     muscadine, malmsey, and whippincrust, hold, belly, hold; [93] and
     we'll not pay one penny for it.

     DICK. O, brave!  Prithee, [94] let's to it presently, for I am as
     dry as a dog.

     ROBIN. Come, then, let's away.
          [Exeunt.]

          Enter CHORUS.

     CHORUS. Learned Faustus,
     To find the secrets of astronomy
     Graven in the book of Jove's high firmament,
     Did mount him [95] up to scale Olympus' top;
     Where, sitting in a chariot burning bright,
     Drawn by the strength of yoked dragons' necks,
     He views [96] the clouds, the planets, and the stars,
     The tropic zones, and quarters of the sky,
     From the bright circle of the horned moon
     Even to the height of Primum Mobile;
     And, whirling round with this [97] circumference,
     Within the concave compass of the pole,
     From east to west his dragons swiftly glide,
     And in eight days did bring him home again.
     Not long he stay'd within his quiet house,
     To rest his bones after his weary toil;
     But new exploits do hale him out again:
     And, mounted then upon a dragon's back,
     That with his wings did part the subtle air,
     He now is gone to prove cosmography,
     That measures coasts and kingdoms of the earth;
     And, as I guess, will first arrive at Rome,
     To see the Pope and manner of his court,
     And take some part of holy Peter's feast,
     The which this day is highly solemniz'd.
          [Exit.]

          Enter FAUSTUS and MEPHISTOPHILIS.

     FAUSTUS. Having now, my good Mephistophilis,
     Pass'd with delight the stately town of Trier,
     Environ'd round [98] with airy mountain-tops,
     With walls of flint, and deep-entrenched lakes,
     Not to be won by any conquering prince;
     From Paris next, coasting the realm of France,
     We saw the river Maine fall into Rhine, [99]
     Whose banks are set with groves of fruitful vines;
     Then up to [100] Naples, rich Campania,
     Whose buildings fair and gorgeous to the eye,
     The streets straight forth, and pav'd with finest brick,
     Quarter the town in four equivalents: [101]
     There saw we learned Maro's golden tomb;
     The way he cut, an English mile in length,
     Thorough [102] a rock of stone, in one night's space;
     From thence to Venice, Padua, and the rest, [103]
     In one of which a sumptuous temple stands,
     That threats the stars with her aspiring top,
     Whose frame is pav'd with sundry-colour'd stones,
     And roof'd aloft with curious work in gold.
     Thus hitherto hath Faustus spent his time:
     But tell me [104] now, what resting-place is this?
     Hast thou, as erst I did command,
     Conducted me within the walls of Rome?

     MEPHIST. I have, my Faustus; and, for proof thereof,
     This is the goodly palace of the Pope;
     And, 'cause we are no common guests,
     I choose his privy-chamber for our use.

     FAUSTUS. I hope his Holiness will bid us [105] welcome.

     MEPHIST. All's one, for we'll be bold with his venison.
     But now, my Faustus, that thou mayst perceive
     What Rome contains for to delight thine eyes,
     Know that this city stands upon seven hills
     That underprop the groundwork of the same:
     Just through [106] the midst runs flowing Tiber's stream,
     With winding banks that cut it in two parts;
     Over the which two stately bridges lean,
     That make safe passage to each part of Rome:
     Upon the bridge call'd Ponte [107] Angelo
     Erected is a castle passing strong,
     Where thou shalt see such store of ordnance,
     As that the double cannons, forg'd of brass,
     Do match [108] the number of the days contain'd
     Within the compass of one complete year;
     Beside the gates, and high pyramides,
     That Julius Caesar brought from Africa.

     FAUSTUS. Now, by the kingdoms of infernal rule,
     Of Styx, of Acheron, and the fiery lake
     Of ever-burning Phlegethon, I swear
     That I do long to see the [109] monuments
     And situation of bright-splendent Rome:
     Come, therefore, let's away.

     MEPHIST. Nay, stay, my Faustus:  I know you'd see the Pope,
     And take some part of holy Peter's feast,
     The which, in state and [110] high solemnity,
     This day, is held through Rome and Italy,
     In honour of the Pope's triumphant victory.

     FAUSTUS. Sweet Mephistophilis, thou pleasest me.
     Whilst I am here on earth, let me be cloy'd
     With all things that delight the heart of man:
     My four-and-twenty years of liberty
     I'll spend in pleasure and in dalliance,
     That Faustus' name, whilst [111] this bright frame doth stand,
     May be admir'd thorough [112] the furthest land.

     MEPHIST. 'Tis well said, Faustus.  Come, then, stand by me,
     And thou shalt see them come immediately.

     FAUSTUS. Nay, stay, my gentle Mephistophilis,
     And grant me my [113] request, and then I go.
     Thou know'st, within the compass of eight days
     We view'd the face of heaven, of earth, and hell;
     So high our dragons soar'd into the air,
     That, looking down, the earth appear'd to me
     No bigger than my hand in quantity;
     There did we view the kingdoms of the world,
     And what might please mine eye I there beheld.
     Then in this show let me an actor be,
     That this proud Pope may Faustus' cunning [114] see.

     MEPHIST. Let it be so, my Faustus.  But, first, stay,
     And view their triumphs as they pass this way;
     And then devise what best contents thy mind,
     By cunning in thine art to cross the Pope,
     Or dash the pride of this [115] solemnity;
     To make his monks and abbots stand like apes,
     And point like antics at [116] his triple crown;
     To beat the beads about the friars' pates,
     Or clap huge horns upon the Cardinals' heads;
     Or any villany thou canst devise;
     And I'll perform it, [117] Faustus.  Hark! they come:
     This day shall make thee be admir'd in Rome.

          Enter the CARDINALS and BISHOPS, some bearing crosiers, some
          the pillars; MONKS and FRIARS, singing their procession;
          then the POPE, RAYMOND king of Hungary, the ARCHBISHOP
          OF RHEIMS, BRUNO led in chains, and ATTENDANTS.

     POPE. Cast down our footstool.

     RAYMOND. Saxon Bruno, stoop,
     Whilst on thy back his Holiness ascends
     Saint Peter's chair and state pontifical.

     BRUNO. Proud Lucifer, that state belongs to me;
     But thus I fall to Peter, not to thee.

     POPE. To me and Peter shalt thou grovelling lie,
     And crouch before the Papal dignity.--
     Sound trumpets, then; for thus Saint Peter's heir,
     From Bruno's back, ascends Saint Peter's chair.
          [A flourish while he ascends.]
     Thus, as the gods creep on with feet of wool,
     Long ere with iron hands they punish men,
     So shall our sleeping vengeance now arise,
     And smite with death thy hated enterprise. [118]--
     Lord Cardinals of France and Padua,
     Go forthwith to our [119] holy consistory,
     And read, amongst the statutes decretal,
     What, by the holy council held at Trent,
     The sacred synod hath decreed for him
     That doth assume the Papal government
     Without election and a true consent:
     Away, and bring us word with speed.

     CARDINAL OF FRANCE. We go, my lord.
          [Exeunt CARDINALS of France and Padua.]

     POPE. Lord Raymond.
          [They converse in dumb show.]

     FAUSTUS. Go, haste thee, gentle Mephistophilis,
     Follow the cardinals to the consistory;
     And, as they turn their superstitious books,
     Strike them with sloth and drowsy idleness,
     And make them sleep so sound, that in their shapes
     Thyself and I may parley with this [120] Pope,
     This proud confronter of the Emperor;
     And, in despite of all his holiness,
     Restore this Bruno to his liberty,
     And bear him to the states of Germany.

     MEPHIST. Faustus, I go.

     FAUSTUS. Despatch it soon:
     The Pope shall curse, that Faustus came to Rome.
          [Exeunt FAUSTUS and MEPHISTOPHILIS.]

     BRUNO. Pope Adrian, let me have right [121] of law:
     I was elected by the Emperor.

     POPE. We will depose the Emperor for that deed,
     And curse the people that submit to him:
     Both he and thou shall [122] stand excommunicate,
     And interdict from church's privilege
     And all society of holy men.
     He grows too proud in his authority,
     Lifting his lofty head above the clouds,
     And, like a steeple, overpeers the church:
     But we'll pull down his haughty insolence;
     And, as Pope Alexander, our progenitor,
     Trod on the neck of German Frederick,
     Adding this golden sentence to our praise,
     "That Peter's heirs should tread on Emperors,
     And walk upon the dreadful adder's back,
     Treading the lion and the dragon down,
     And fearless spurn the killing basilisk,"
     So will we quell that haughty schismatic,
     And, by authority apostolical,
     Depose him from his regal government.

     BRUNO. Pope Julius swore to princely Sigismond,
     For him and the succeeding Popes of Rome,
     To hold the Emperors their lawful lords.

     POPE. Pope Julius did abuse the church's rights,
     And therefore none of his decrees can stand.
     Is not all power on earth bestow'd on us?
     And therefore, though we would, we cannot err.
     Behold this silver belt, whereto is fix'd
     Seven golden seals, fast sealed with seven seals,
     In token of our seven-fold power from heaven,
     To bind or loose, lock fast, condemn or judge,
     Resign or seal, or what so pleaseth us:
     Then he and thou, and all the world, shall stoop,
     Or be assured of our dreadful curse,
     To light as heavy as the pains of hell.

          Re-enter FAUSTUS and MEPHISTOPHILIS, in the shapes of the
          CARDINALS of France and Padua.

     MEPHIST. Now tell me, Faustus, are we not fitted well?

     FAUSTUS. Yes, Mephistophilis; and two such cardinals
     Ne'er serv'd a holy Pope as we shall do.
     But, whilst they sleep within the consistory,
     Let us salute his reverend fatherhood.

     RAYMOND. Behold, my lord, the Cardinals are return'd.

     POPE. Welcome, grave fathers: answer presently
     What hath [123] our holy council there decreed
     Concerning Bruno and the Emperor,
     In quittance of their late conspiracy
     Against our state and papal dignity?

     FAUSTUS. Most sacred patron of the church of Rome,
     By full consent of all the synod [124]
     Of priests and prelates, it is thus decreed,--
     That Bruno and the German Emperor
     Be held as Lollards and bold schismatics,
     And proud disturbers of the church's peace;
     And if that Bruno, by his own assent,
     Without enforcement of the German peers,
     Did seek to wear the triple diadem,
     And by your death to climb Saint Peter's chair,
     The statutes decretal have thus decreed,--
     He shall be straight condemn'd of heresy,
     And on a pile of faggots burnt to death.

     POPE. It is enough.  Here, take him to your charge,
     And bear him straight to Ponte [125] Angelo,
     And in the strongest tower enclose him fast.
     To-morrow, sitting in our consistory,
     With all our college of grave cardinals,
     We will determine of his life or death.
     Here, take his [126] triple crown along with you,
     And leave it in the church's treasury.
     Make haste again, my good Lord Cardinals,
     And take our blessing apostolical.

     MEPHIST. So, so; was never devil thus bless'd before.

     FAUSTUS. Away, sweet Mephistophilis, be gone;
     The Cardinals will be plagu'd for this anon.
          [Exeunt FAUSTUS and MEPHISTOPHILIS with BRUNO.]

     POPE. Go presently and bring a banquet forth,
     That we may solemnize Saint Peter's feast,
     And with Lord Raymond, King of Hungary,
     Drink to our late and happy victory.

          A Sennet [127] while the banquet is brought in; and then enter
          FAUSTUS and MEPHISTOPHILIS in their own shapes.

     MEPHIST. Now, Faustus, come, prepare thyself for mirth:
     The sleepy Cardinals are hard at hand,
     To censure Bruno, that is posted hence,
     And on a proud-pac'd steed, as swift as thought,
     Flies o'er the Alps to fruitful Germany,
     There to salute the woful Emperor.

     FAUSTUS. The Pope will curse them for their sloth to-day,
     That slept both Bruno and his crown away.
     But now, that Faustus may delight his mind,
     And by their folly make some merriment,
     Sweet Mephistophilis, so charm me here,
     That I may walk invisible to all,
     And do whate'er I please, unseen of any.

     MEPHIST. Faustus, thou shalt:  then kneel down presently,
     Whilst on thy head I lay my hand,
     And charm thee with this magic wand.
     First, wear this girdle; then appear
     Invisible to all are here:
     The planets seven, the gloomy air,
     Hell, and the Furies' forked hair,
     Pluto's blue fire, and Hecat's tree,
     With magic spells so compass thee,
     That no eye may thy body see!
     So, Faustus, now, for all their holiness,
     Do what thou wilt, thou shalt not be discern'd.

     FAUSTUS. Thanks, Mephistophilis.--Now, friars, take heed,
     Lest Faustus make your shaven crowns to bleed.

     MEPHIST. Faustus, no more:  see, where the Cardinals come!

          Re-enter the CARDINALS of France and Padua with a book.

     POPE. Welcome, Lord Cardinals; come, sit down.--
     Lord Raymond, take your seat.--Friars, attend,
     And see that all things be [128] in readiness,
     As best beseems this solemn festival.

     CARDINAL OF FRANCE. First, may it please your sacred Holiness
     To view the sentence of the reverend synod
     Concerning Bruno and the Emperor?

     POPE. What needs this question? did I not tell you,
     To-morrow we would sit i' the consistory,
     And there determine of his punishment?
     You brought us word even now, it was decreed
     That Bruno and the cursed Emperor
     Were by the holy council both condemn'd
     For loathed Lollards and base schismatics:
     Then wherefore would you have me view that book?

     CARDINAL OF FRANCE. Your grace mistakes; you gave us no such charge.

     RAYMOND. Deny it not; we all are witnesses
     That Bruno here was late deliver'd you,
     With his rich triple crown to be reserv'd
     And put into the church's treasury.

     BOTH CARDINALS. By holy Paul, we saw them not!

     POPE. By Peter, you shall die,
     Unless you bring them forth immediately!--
     Hale them to [129] prison, lade their limbs with gyves.--
     False prelates, for this hateful treachery
     Curs'd be your souls to hellish misery!
          [Exeunt ATTENDANTS with the two CARDINALS.]

     FAUSTUS. So, they are safe.  Now, Faustus, to the feast:
     The Pope had never such a frolic guest.

     POPE. Lord Archbishop of Rheims, sit down with us.

     ARCHBISHOP. [130] I thank your Holiness.

     FAUSTUS. Fall to; the devil choke you, [131] an you spare!

     POPE. Who is that spoke?--Friars, look about.--
     Lord Raymond, pray, fall to. I am beholding [132]
     To the Bishop of Milan for this so rare a present.

     FAUSTUS. I thank you, sir.
          [Snatches the dish.]

     POPE. How now! who snatch'd the meat from me?
     Villains, why speak you not?--
     My good Lord Archbishop, here's a most dainty dish
     Was sent me from a cardinal in France.

     FAUSTUS. I'll have that too.
          [Snatches the dish.]

     POPE. What Lollards do attend our holiness,
     That we receive such [133] great indignity?
     Fetch me some wine.

     FAUSTUS. Ay, pray, do, for Faustus is a-dry.

     POPE. Lord Raymond,
     I drink unto your grace.

     FAUSTUS. I pledge your grace.
          [Snatches the cup.]

     POPE. My wine gone too!--Ye lubbers, look about,
     And find the man that doth this villany,
     Or, by our sanctitude, you all shall die!--
     I pray, my lords, have patience at this
     Troublesome banquet.

     ARCHBISHOP. Please it [134] your Holiness, I think it be some ghost
     crept out of Purgatory, and now is come unto your Holiness for his
     pardon.

     POPE. It may be so.--
     Go, then, command our priests to sing a dirge,
     To lay the fury of this same troublesome ghost.
          [Exit an ATTENDANT.--The POPE crosses himself.]

     FAUSTUS. How now! must every bit be spic'd with a cross?--
     Nay, then, take that.
          [Strikes the POPE.]

     POPE. O, I am slain!--Help me, my lords!
     O, come and help to bear my body hence!--
     Damn'd be his [135] soul for ever for this deed!
          [Exeunt all except FAUSTUS and MEPHISTOPHILIS.]

     MEPHIST. Now, Faustus, what will you do now? for I can tell you
     you'll be cursed with bell, book, and candle.

     FAUSTUS. Bell, book, and candle,--candle, book, and bell,--
     Forward and backward, to curse Faustus to hell!

          Re-enter the FRIARS, with bell, book, and candle, for the
          Dirge.

     FIRST FRIAR. Come, brethren, lets about our business with good
     devotion.
          [They sing.]

     CURSED BE HE THAT STOLE HIS HOLINESS' MEAT FROM THE TABLE!
     maledicat Dominus!
     CURSED BE HE THAT STRUCK [136] HIS HOLINESS A BLOW ON [137] THE
     FACE!  maledicat Dominus!
     CURSED BE HE THAT STRUCK FRIAR SANDELO A BLOW ON THE PATE!
     maledicat Dominus!
     CURSED BE HE THAT DISTURBETH OUR HOLY DIRGE!  maledicat
     Dominus!
     CURSED BE HE THAT TOOK AWAY HIS HOLINESS' WINE!  maledicat
     Dominus!

          [MEPHISTOPHILIS and FAUSTUS beat the FRIARS, and fling
          fire-works among them, and exeunt.]

          Enter ROBIN and DICK with a cup.

     DICK. Sirrah Robin, we were best look that your devil can answer
     the stealing of this same [138] cup, for the Vintner's boy follows
     us at the hard heels. [139]

     ROBIN. 'Tis no matter; let him come:  an he follow us, I'll so
     conjure him as he was never conjured in his life, I warrant him.
     Let me see the cup.

     DICK. Here 'tis.
          [Gives the cup to ROBIN.]
     Yonder he comes:  now, Robin, now or never shew thy cunning.

          Enter VINTNER. [140]

     VINTNER. O, are you here?  I am glad I have found you.  You are
     a couple of fine companions:  pray, where's the cup you stole
     from the tavern?

     ROBIN. How, how! we steal a cup! take heed what you say:  we look
     not like cup-stealers, I can tell you.

     VINTNER. Never deny't, for I know you have it; and I'll search you.

     ROBIN. Search me! ay, and spare not.
     --Hold the cup, Dick [Aside to DICK, giving him the cup].--
     Come, come, search me, search me.

          [VINTNER searches him.]

     VINTNER. Come on, sirrah, let me search you now.

     DICK. Ay, ay, do, do.
     --Hold the cup, Robin [Aside to ROBIN, giving him the cup].--
     I fear not your searching: we scorn to steal your [141] cups,
     I can tell you.

          [VINTNER searches him.]

     VINTNER. Never out-face me for the matter; for, sure, the cup
     is between you two.

     ROBIN. Nay, there you lie; 'tis beyond us both.

     VINTNER. A plague take you! I thought 'twas your knavery to take
     it away:  come, give it me again.

     ROBIN. Ay, much! [142] when, can you tell?--Dick, make me a circle,
     and stand close at my back, and stir not for thy life.--Vintner,
     you shall have your cup anon.--Say nothing, Dick.--[Reads from
     a book] O per se, O; Demogorgon; Belcher, and Mephistophilis!

          Enter MEPHISTOPHILIS.

     MEPHIST. You princely legions of infernal rule,
     How am I vexed by these villains' charms!
     From Constantinople have they brought me now,
     Only for pleasure of these damned slaves.
          [Exit VINTNER.]

     ROBIN. By lady, [143] sir, you have had a shrewd journey of it!
     will it please you to [144] take a shoulder of mutton to supper,
     and a tester [145] in your purse, and go back again?

     DICK. Ay, I pray you heartily, sir; for we called you but in jest,
     I promise you.

     MEPHIST. To purge the rashness of this cursed deed,
     First, be thou turned to this ugly shape,
     For apish deeds transformed to an ape.

     ROBIN. O, brave! an ape!  I pray, sir, let me have the carrying
     of him about, to shew some tricks.

     MEPHIST. And so thou shalt:  be thou transformed to a dog, and
     carry him upon thy back.  Away! be gone!

     ROBIN. A dog! that's excellent:  let the maids look well to their
     porridge-pots, for I'll into the kitchen presently.--Come, Dick,
     come.
          [Exeunt ROBIN and DICK.]

     MEPHIST. Now with the flames of ever-burning fire
     I'll wing myself, and forthwith fly amain(sic)
     Unto my Faustus, to the Great Turk's court.
          [Exit.]

          Enter MARTINO and FREDERICK at several doors.

     MARTINO. What, ho, officers, gentlemen!
     Hie to the presence to attend the Emperor.--
     Good Frederick, see the rooms be voided straight:
     His majesty is coming to the hall;
     Go back, and see the state [146] in readiness.

     FREDERICK. But where is Bruno, our elected Pope,
     That on a Fury's back came post from Rome?
     Will not his grace consort the Emperor?

     MARTINO. O, yes; and with him comes the German conjurer,
     The learned Faustus, fame of Wittenberg,
     The wonder of the world for magic art;
     And he intends to shew great Carolus
     The race of all his stout progenitors,
     And bring in presence of his majesty
     The royal shapes and perfect [147] semblances
     Of Alexander and his beauteous paramour.

     FREDERICK. Where is Benvolio?

     MARTINO. Fast asleep, I warrant you;
     He took his rouse [148] with stoops of Rhenish wine
     So kindly yesternight to Bruno's health,
     That all this day the sluggard keeps his bed.

     FREDERICK. See, see, his window's ope! we'll call to him.

     MARTINO. What, ho! Benvolio!

          Enter BENVOLIO above, at a window, in his nightcap, buttoning.

     BENVOLIO. What a devil ail you two?

     MARTINO. Speak softly, sir, lest the devil hear you;
     For Faustus at the court is late arriv'd,
     And at his heels a [149] thousand Furies wait,
     To accomplish whatsoe'er the doctor please.

     BENVOLIO. What of this?

     MARTINO. Come, leave thy chamber first, and thou shalt see
     This conjurer perform such rare exploits,
     Before the Pope and royal Emperor,
     As never yet was seen in Germany.

     BENVOLIO. Has not the Pope enough of conjuring yet?
     He was upon the devil's back late enough:
     An if he be so far in love with him,
     I would he would post with him to Rome again!

     FREDERICK. Speak, wilt thou come and see this sport?

     BENVOLIO. Not I.

     MARTINO. Wilt thou stand in thy window, and see it, then?

     BENVOLIO. Ay, an I fall not asleep i' the mean time.

     MARTINO. The Emperor is at hand, who comes to see
     What wonders by black spells may compass'd be.

     BENVOLIO. Well, go you attend the Emperor.  I am content, for
     this once, to thrust my head out at a [150] window; for they
     say, if a man be drunk over night, the devil cannot hurt him
     in the morning:  if that be true, I have a charm in my head,
     shall control him as well as the conjurer, I warrant you.
          [Exeunt FREDERICK and MARTINO.]

          A Sennet.  Enter CHARLES the German Emperor, BRUNO,
          DUKE OF SAXONY, FAUSTUS, MEPHISTOPHILIS, FREDERICK,
          MARTINO, and Attendants.

     EMPEROR. Wonder of men, renowm'd [151] magician,
     Thrice-learned Faustus, welcome to our court.
     This deed of thine, in setting Bruno free
     From his and our professed enemy,
     Shall add more excellence unto thine art
     Than if by powerful necromantic spells
     Thou couldst command the world's obedience:
     For ever be belov'd of Carolus!
     And if this Bruno, thou hast late redeem'd,
     In peace possess the triple diadem,
     And sit in Peter's chair, despite of chance,
     Thou shalt be famous through [152] all Italy,
     And honour'd of the German Emperor.

     FAUSTUS. These [153] gracious words, most royal Carolus,
     Shall make poor Faustus, to his utmost power,
     Both love and serve the German Emperor,
     And lay his life at holy Bruno's feet:
     For proof whereof, if so your grace be pleas'd,
     The doctor stands prepar'd by power of art
     To cast his magic charms, that shall pierce through [154]
     The ebon gates of ever-burning hell,
     And hale the stubborn Furies from their caves,
     To compass whatsoe'er your grace commands.

     BENVOLIO. Blood, he speaks terribly! but, for all that, I do not
     greatly believe him:  he looks as like a [155] conjurer as the Pope
     to a costermonger. [Aside.]

     EMPEROR. Then, Faustus, as thou late didst promise us,
     We would behold that famous conqueror,
     Great Alexander, and his paramour,
     In their true shapes and state majestical,
     That we may wonder at their excellence.

     FAUSTUS. Your majesty shall see them presently.--
     Mephistophilis, away,
     And, with a solemn noise of trumpets' sound,
     Present before this [156] royal Emperor
     Great Alexander and his beauteous paramour.

     MEPHIST. Faustus, I will.
          [Exit.]

     BENVOLIO. Well, Master Doctor, an your devils come not away
     quickly, you shall have me asleep presently:  zounds, I could
     eat myself for anger, to think I have been such an ass all this
     while, to stand gaping after the devil's governor, and can see
     nothing!

     FAUSTUS.
     I'll make you feel something anon, if my art fail me not.--
     My lord, I must forewarn your majesty,
     That, when my spirits present the royal shapes
     Of Alexander and his paramour,
     Your grace demand [157] no questions of the king,
     But in dumb silence let them come and go.

     EMPEROR. Be it as Faustus please; we are content.

     BENVOLIO. Ay, ay, and I am content too:  an thou bring Alexander
     and his paramour before the Emperor, I'll be Actaeon, and turn
     myself to a stag.

     FAUSTUS. And I'll play Diana, and send you the horns presently.

          Sennet.  Enter, at one door, [158] the EMPEROR ALEXANDER, at
          the other, DARIUS.  They meet.  DARIUS is thrown down;
          ALEXANDER kills him, takes off his crown, and, offering to
          go out, his PARAMOUR meets him.  He embraceth her, and sets
          DARIUS' crown upon her head; and, coming back, both salute
          the EMPEROR, who, leaving his state, [159] offers to embrace
          them; which FAUSTUS seeing, suddenly stays him.  Then trumpets
          cease, and music sounds.

     My gracious lord, you do forget yourself;
     These [160] are but shadows, not substantial.

     EMPEROR. O, pardon me! my thoughts are so ravish'd
     With sight of this renowmed [161] emperor,
     That in mine arms I would have compass'd him.
     But, Faustus, since I may not speak to them,
     To satisfy my longing thoughts [162] at full,
     Let me this tell thee:  I have heard it said
     That this fair lady, whilst [163] she liv'd on earth,
     Had on her neck a little wart or mole;
     How may I prove that saying to be true?

     FAUSTUS. Your majesty may boldly go and see.

     EMPEROR. Faustus, I see it plain;
     And in this sight thou better pleasest me
     Than if I gain'd [164] another monarchy.

     FAUSTUS. Away! be gone! [Exit show.]--See, see, my gracious
     lord! what strange beast is yon, that thrusts his head out at
     window? [165]

     EMPEROR. O, wondrous sight!--See, Duke of Saxony,
     Two spreading horns most strangely fastened
     Upon the head of young Benvolio!

     SAXONY. What, is he asleep or dead?

     FAUSTUS. He sleeps, my lord; but dreams not of his horns.

     EMPEROR. This sport is excellent:  we'll call and wake him.--
     What, ho, Benvolio!

     BENVOLIO. A plague upon you! let me sleep a while.

     EMPEROR. I blame thee not to sleep much, having such a head of
     thine own.

     SAXONY. Look up, Benvolio; 'tis the Emperor calls.

     BENVOLIO. The Emperor! where?--O, zounds, my head!

     EMPEROR. Nay, an thy horns hold, 'tis no matter for thy head,
     for that's armed sufficiently.

     FAUSTUS. Why, how now, Sir Knight! what, hanged by the horns!
     this is [166] most horrible:  fie, fie, pull in your head, for
     shame! let not all the world wonder at you.

     BENVOLIO. Zounds, doctor, this is [167] your villany!

     FAUSTUS. O, say not so, sir! the doctor has no skill,
     No art, no cunning, to present these lords,
     Or bring before this royal Emperor
     The mighty monarch, warlike Alexander.
     If Faustus do it, you are straight resolv'd,
     In bold Actaeon's shape, to turn a stag:--
     And therefore, my lord, so please your majesty,
     I'll raise a kennel of hounds shall hunt him so
     As [168] all his footmanship shall scarce prevail
     To keep his carcass from their bloody fangs.--
     Ho, Belimoth, Argiron, Asteroth! [169]

     BENVOLIO. Hold, hold!--Zounds, he'll raise up a kennel of devils,
     I think, anon.--Good my lord, entreat for me.--'Sblood, I am never
     able to endure these torments.

     EMPEROR. Then, good Master Doctor,
     Let me entreat you to remove his horns;
     He has [170] done penance now sufficiently.

     FAUSTUS. My gracious lord, not so much for injury done to me,
     as to delight your majesty with some mirth, hath Faustus justly
     requited this injurious knight; which being all I desire, I am
     content to remove his horns. [171]--Mephistophilis, transform him
     [MEPHISTOPHILIS removes the horns]:--and hereafter, sir, [172]
     look you speak well of scholars.

     BENVOLIO. Speak well of ye! 'sblood, an scholars be such
     cuckold-makers, to clap horns of [173] honest men's heads o' this
     order, I'll ne'er trust smooth faces and small ruffs more.--But,
     an I be not revenged for this, would I might be turned to a
     gaping oyster, and drink nothing but salt water!
          [Aside, and then exit above.]

     EMPEROR. Come, Faustus:  while the Emperor lives,
     In recompense of this thy high desert,
     Thou shalt command the state of Germany,
     And live belov'd of mighty Carolus.
          [Exeunt.]

     Enter BENVOLIO, MARTINO, FREDERICK, and SOLDIERS.

     MARTINO. Nay, sweet Benvolio, let us sway [174] thy thoughts
     From this attempt against the conjurer. [175]

     BENVOLIO. Away! you love me not, to urge me thus:
     Shall I let slip so great an injury,
     When every servile groom jests at my wrongs,
     And in their rustic gambols proudly say,
     "Benvolio's head was grac'd with horns today?"
     O, may these eyelids never close again,
     Till with my sword I have that [176] conjurer slain!
     If you will aid me in this enterprise,
     Then draw your weapons and be resolute;
     If not, depart:  here will Benvolio die,
     But Faustus' death shall quit my [177] infamy.

     FREDERICK. Nay, we will stay with thee, betide what may,
     And kill that [178] doctor, if he come this way.

     BENVOLIO. Then, gentle Frederick, hie thee to the grove,
     And place our servants and our followers
     Close in an [179] ambush there behind the trees.
     By this, I know the conjurer is near:
     I saw him kneel, and kiss the Emperor's hand,
     And take his leave, laden with rich rewards.
     Then, soldiers, boldly [180] fight:  if Faustus die,
     Take you the wealth, leave us the victory.

     FREDERICK. Come, soldiers, follow me unto the grove:
     Who kills him shall have gold and endless love.
          [Exit FREDERICK with SOLDIERS.]

     BENVOLIO. My head is lighter, than it was, by the horns;
     But yet my heart's [181] more ponderous than my head,
     And pants until I see that [182] conjurer dead.

     MARTINO. Where shall we place ourselves, Benvolio?

     BENVOLIO. Here will we stay to bide the first assault:
     O, were that damned hell-hound but in place,
     Thou soon shouldst see me quit my foul disgrace!

          Re-enter FREDERICK.

     FREDERICK. Close, close! the conjurer is at hand,
     And all alone comes walking in his gown;
     Be ready, then, and strike the [183] peasant down.

     BENVOLIO. Mine be that honour, then.  Now, sword, strike home!
     For horns he gave I'll have his head anon.

     MARTINO. See, see, he comes!

          Enter FAUSTUS with a false head.

     BENVOLIO. No words.  This blow ends all:
     Hell take his soul! his body thus must fall.
          [Stabs FAUSTUS.]

     FAUSTUS. [falling.] O!

     FREDERICK. Groan you, Master Doctor?

     BENVOLIO. Break may his heart with groans!--Dear Frederick, see,
     Thus will I end his griefs immediately.

     MARTINO. Strike with a willing hand.
          [BENVOLIO strikes off FAUSTUS' head.]
                                           His head is off.

     BENVOLIO. The devil's dead; the Furies now [184] may laugh.

     FREDERICK. Was this that stern aspect, that awful frown,
     Made the grim monarch of infernal spirits
     Tremble and quake at his commanding charms?

     MARTINO. Was this that damned head, whose art [185] conspir'd
     Benvolio's shame before the Emperor?

     BENVOLIO. Ay, that's the head, and there [186] the body lies,
     Justly rewarded for his villanies.

     FREDERICK. Come, let's devise how we may add more shame
     To the black scandal of his hated name.

     BENVOLIO. First, on his head, in quittance of my wrongs,
     I'll nail huge forked horns, and let them hang
     Within the window where he yok'd me first,
     That all the world may see my just revenge.

     MARTINO. What use shall we put his beard to?

     BENVOLIO. We'll sell it to a chimney-sweeper:  it will wear out
     ten birchen brooms, I warrant you.

     FREDERICK. What shall his [187] eyes do?

     BENVOLIO. We'll pull [188] out his eyes; and they shall serve for
     buttons to his lips, to keep his tongue from catching cold.

     MARTINO. An excellent policy! and now, sirs, having divided him,
     what shall the body do?
          [FAUSTUS rises.]

     BENVOLIO. Zounds, the devil's alive again!

     FREDERICK. Give him his head, for God's sake.

     FAUSTUS. Nay, keep it:  Faustus will have heads and hands,
     Ay, all [189] your hearts to recompense this deed.
     Knew you not, traitors, I was limited
     For four-and-twenty years to breathe on earth?
     And, had you cut my body with your swords,
     Or hew'd this flesh and bones as small as sand,
     Yet in a minute had my spirit return'd,
     And I had breath'd a man, made free from harm.
     But wherefore do I dally my revenge?--
     Asteroth, Belimoth, Mephistophilis?

          Enter MEPHISTOPHILIS, and other Devils.

     Go, horse these traitors on your fiery backs,
     And mount aloft with them as high as heaven:
     Thence pitch them headlong to the lowest hell.
     Yet, stay: the world shall see their misery,
     And hell shall after plague their treachery.
     Go, Belimoth, and take this caitiff hence,
     And hurl him in some lake of mud and dirt.
     Take thou this other, drag him through [190] the woods
     Amongst [191] the pricking thorns and sharpest briers;
     Whilst, with my gentle Mephistophilis,
     This traitor flies unto some steepy rock,
     That, rolling down, may break the villain's bones,
     As he intended to dismember me.
     Fly hence; despatch my charge immediately.

     FREDERICK. Pity us, gentle Faustus! save our lives!

     FAUSTUS. Away!

     FREDERICK. He must needs go that the devil drives.
          [Exeunt MEPHISTOPHILIS and DEVILS with BENVOLIO, MARTINO,
          and FREDERICK.]

          Enter the ambushed SOLDIERS. [192]

     FIRST SOLDIER. Come, sirs, prepare yourselves in readiness;
     Make haste to help these noble gentlemen:
     I heard them parley with the conjurer.

     SECOND SOLDIER. See, where he comes! despatch and kill the slave.

     FAUSTUS. What's here? an ambush to betray my life!
     Then, Faustus, try thy skill.--Base peasants, stand!
     For, lo, these [193] trees remove at my command,
     And stand as bulwarks 'twixt yourselves and me,
     To shield me from your hated treachery!
     Yet, to encounter this your weak attempt,
     Behold, an army comes incontinent!

          FAUSTUS strikes the door, [194] and enter a DEVIL playing
          on a drum; after him another, bearing an ensign; and divers
          with weapons; MEPHISTOPHILIS with fire-works.  They set upon
          the SOLDIERS, drive them out, and exeunt.

          Enter, at several doors, BENVOLIO, FREDERICK, and MARTINO,
          their heads and faces bloody, and besmeared with mud and
          dirt; all having horns on their heads.

     MARTINO. What, ho, Benvolio!

     BENVOLIO. Here.--What, Frederick, ho!

     FREDERICK. O, help me, gentle friend!--Where is Martino?

     MARTINO. Dear Frederick, here,
     Half smother'd in a lake of mud and dirt,
     Through which the Furies dragg'd me by the heels.

     FREDERICK. Martino, see, Benvolio's horns again!

     MARTINO. O, misery!--How now, Benvolio!

     BENVOLIO. Defend me, heaven! shall I be haunted still?

     MARTINO. Nay, fear not, man; we have no power to kill.

     BENVOLIO. My friends transformed thus!  O, hellish spite!
     Your heads are all set with horns.

     FREDERICK. You hit it right;
     It is your own you mean; feel on your head.

     BENVOLIO. Zounds, [195] horns again!

     MARTINO. Nay, chafe not, man; we all are [196] sped.

     BENVOLIO. What devil attends this damn'd magician,
     That, spite of spite, our wrongs are doubled?

     FREDERICK. What may we do, that we may hide our shames?

     BENVOLIO. If we should follow him to work revenge,
     He'd join long asses' ears to these huge horns,
     And make us laughing-stocks to all the world.

     MARTINO. What shall we, then, do, dear Benvolio?

     BENVOLIO. I have a castle joining near these woods;
     And thither we'll repair, and live obscure,
     Till time shall alter these [197] our brutish shapes:
     Sith black disgrace hath thus eclips'd our fame,
     We'll rather die with grief than live with shame.
          [Exeunt.]

          Enter FAUSTUS, a HORSE-COURSER, and MEPHISTOPHILIS.

     HORSE-COURSER. I beseech your worship, accept of these forty dollars.

     FAUSTUS. Friend, thou canst not buy so good a horse for so small
     a price. I have no great need to sell him:  but, if thou likest
     him for ten dollars more, take him, because I see thou hast a
     good mind to him.

     HORSE-COURSER. I beseech you, sir, accept of this:  I am a very
     poor man, and have lost very much of late by horse-flesh, and
     this bargain will set me up again.

     FAUSTUS. Well, I will not stand with thee:  give me the money
     [HORSE-COURSER gives FAUSTUS the money].  Now, sirrah, I must
     tell you that you may ride him o'er hedge and ditch, and spare
     him not; but, do you hear? in any case, ride him not into the
     water.

     HORSE-COURSER. How, sir! not into the water! why, will he not
     drink of all waters?

     FAUSTUS. Yes, he will drink of all waters; but ride him not into
     the water: o'er hedge and ditch, or where thou wilt, but not into
     the water.  Go, bid the hostler deliver him unto you, and remember
     what I say.

     HORSE-COURSER. I warrant you, sir!--O, joyful day! now am I a
     made man for ever.
          [Exit.]

     FAUSTUS. What art thou, Faustus, but a man condemn'd to die?
     Thy fatal time draws to a final end;
     Despair doth drive distrust into my thoughts:
     Confound these passions with a quiet sleep:
     Tush, Christ did call the thief upon the Cross;
     Then rest thee, Faustus, quiet in conceit.
          [He sits to sleep.]

          Re-enter the HORSE-COURSER, wet.

     HORSE-COURSER. 0, what a cozening doctor was this!  I, riding
     my horse into the water, thinking some hidden mystery had been
     in the horse, I had nothing under me but a little straw, and had
     much ado to escape [198] drowning.  Well, I'll go rouse him, and
     make him give me my forty dollars again.--Ho, sirrah Doctor, you
     cozening scab!  Master Doctor, awake, and rise, and give me my
     money again, for your horse is turned to a bottle of hay, Master
     Doctor! [He pulls off FAUSTUS' leg].  Alas, I am undone! what
     shall I do? I have pulled off his leg.

     FAUSTUS. O, help, help! the villain hath murdered me.

     HORSE-COURSER. Murder or not murder, now he has [199] but one leg,
     I'll outrun him, and cast this leg into some ditch or other.
          [Aside, and then runs out.]

     FAUSTUS. Stop him, stop him, stop him!--Ha, ha, ha!  Faustus hath
     his leg again, and the Horse-courser a bundle of hay for his
     forty dollars.

          Enter WAGNER.

     How now, Wagner! what news with thee?

     WAGNER. If it please you, the Duke of Vanholt doth earnestly
     entreat your company, and hath sent some of his men to attend
     you, [200] with provision fit for your journey.

     FAUSTUS. The Duke of Vanholt's an honourable gentleman, and one
     to whom I must be no niggard of my cunning.  Come, away!
          [Exeunt.

          Enter ROBIN, DICK, the HORSE-COURSER, and a CARTER.

     CARTER. Come, my masters, I'll bring you to the best beer in
     Europe.--What, ho, hostess! where be these whores?

          Enter HOSTESS.

     HOSTESS. How now! what lack you?  What, my old guess! [201] welcome.

     ROBIN. Sirrah Dick, dost thou [202] know why I stand so mute?

     DICK. No, Robin:  why is't?

     ROBIN. I am eighteen-pence on the score. but say nothing; see
     if she have forgotten me.

     HOSTESS. Who's this that stands so solemnly by himself?  What,
     my old guest!

     ROBIN. O, hostess, how do you?  I hope my score stands still.

     HOSTESS. Ay, there's no doubt of that; for methinks you make no
     haste to wipe it out.

     DICK. Why, hostess, I say, fetch us some beer.

     HOSTESS. You shall presently.--Look up into the hall there, ho!
          [Exit.--Drink is presently brought in.]

     DICK. Come, sirs, what shall we do now [203] till mine hostess comes?

     CARTER. Marry, sir, [204] I'll tell you the bravest tale how a
     conjurer served me.  You know Doctor Faustus?

     HORSE-COURSER. Ay, a plague take him! here's some on's have cause
     to know him.  Did he conjure thee too?

     CARTER. I'll tell you how he served me.  As I was going to
     Wittenberg, t'other day, [205] with a load of hay, he met me, and
     asked me what he should give me for as much hay as he could eat.
     Now, sir, I thinking that a little would serve his turn, bad him
     take as much as he would for three farthings:  so he presently
     gave me my [206] money and fell to eating; and, as I am a cursen [207]
     man, he never left eating till he had eat up all my load of hay.

     ALL. O, monstrous! eat a whole load of hay!

     ROBIN. Yes, yes, that may be; for I have heard of one that has eat
     a load of logs.

     HORSE-COURSER. Now, sirs, you shall hear how villanously he
     served me.  I went to him yesterday to buy a horse of him, and
     he would by no means sell him under forty dollars.  So, sir,
     because I knew him to be such a horse as would run over hedge
     and ditch and never tire, I gave him his money.  So, when I had
     my horse, Doctor Faustus bad me ride him night and day, and spare
     him no time; but, quoth he, in any case, ride him not into the
     water.  Now, sir, I thinking the horse had had some quality [208]
     that he would not have me know of, what did I but rid [209] him
     into a great river? and when I came just in the midst, my horse
     vanished away, and I sate straddling upon a bottle of hay.

     ALL. O, brave doctor!

     HORSE-COURSER. But you shall hear how bravely I served him for
     it.  I went me home to his house, and there I found him asleep.
     I kept a hallooing and whooping in his ears; but all could not
     wake him.  I, seeing that, took him by the leg, and never rested
     pulling till I had pulled me his leg quite off; and now 'tis at
     home in mine hostry.

     ROBIN. And has the doctor but one leg, then? that's excellent;
     for one of his devils turned me into the likeness of an ape's face.

     CARTER. Some more drink, hostess!

     ROBIN. Hark you, we'll into another room and drink a while, and
     then we'll go seek out the doctor.
          [Exeunt.]

          Enter the DUKE OF VANHOLT, his DUCHESS, FAUSTUS, MEPHISTOPHILIS,
          and ATTENDANTS.

     DUKE. Thanks, Master Doctor, for these pleasant sights; nor know
     I how sufficiently to recompense your great deserts in erecting
     that enchanted castle in the air, [210] the sight whereof so
     delighted [211] me as nothing in the world could please me more.

     FAUSTUS. I do think myself, my good lord, highly recompensed in
     that it pleaseth [212] your grace to think but well of that which
     Faustus hath performed.--But, gracious lady, it may be that you
     have taken no pleasure in those sights; therefore, I pray you
     tell me, what is the thing you most desire to have; be it in the
     world, it shall be yours: I have heard that great-bellied women
     do long for things are rare and dainty.

     DUCHESS. True, Master Doctor; and, since I find you so kind,
     I will make known unto you what my heart desires to have; and,
     were it now summer, as it is January, a dead time of the winter,
     I would request no better meat than a dish of ripe grapes.

     FAUSTUS. This is but a small matter.--Go, Mephistophilis; away!
          [Exit MEPHISTOPHILIS.]
     Madam, I will do more than this for your content.

          Re-Enter MEPHISTOPHILIS with grapes.

     Here now, taste you these: they should be good, for they come [213]
     from a far country, I can tell you.

     DUKE. This makes me wonder more than all the rest, that at this
     time of the year, when every tree is barren of his fruit, from
     whence you had these ripe grapes. [214]

     FAUSTUS. Please it your grace, the year is divided into two
     circles over the whole world; so that, when it is winter with
     us, in the contrary circle it is likewise summer with them, as
     in India, Saba, and such countries that lie far east, where
     they have fruit twice a-year; from whence, by means of a swift
     spirit that I have, I had these grapes brought, as you see.

     DUCHESS. And, trust me, they are the sweetest grapes that e'er
     I tasted.

          The CLOWNS bounce [215] at the gate, within.

     DUKE. What rude disturbers have we at the gate?
     Go, pacify their fury, set it ope,
     And then demand of them what they would have.

          [They knock again, and call out to talk with FAUSTUS.]

     SERVANT. Why, how now, masters! what a coil is there!
     What is the reason you disturb the Duke?

     DICK [within]. We have no reason for it; therefore a fig for him!

     SERVANT. Why, saucy varlets, dare you be so bold?

     HORSE-COURSER [within]. I hope, sir, we have wit enough to be
     more bold than welcome.

     SERVANT. It appears so:  pray, be bold elsewhere, and trouble
     not the Duke.

     DUKE. What would they have?

     SERVANT. They all cry out to speak with Doctor Faustus.

     CARTER [within]. Ay, and we will speak with him.

     DUKE. Will you, sir?--Commit the rascals.

     DICK [within]. Commit with us! he were as good commit with his
     father as commit with us.

     FAUSTUS. I do beseech your grace, let them come in;
     They are good subject for [216] a merriment.

     DUKE. Do as thou wilt, Faustus; I give thee leave.

     FAUSTUS. I thank your grace.

          Enter ROBIN, DICK, CARTER, and HORSE-COURSER.

     Why, how now, my good friends!
     Faith, you are too outrageous:  but, come near;
     I have procur'd your pardons: [217]  welcome, all.

     ROBIN. Nay, sir, we will be welcome for our money, and we will
     pay for what we take.--What, ho! give's half a dozen of beer here,
     and be hanged!

     FAUSTUS. Nay, hark you; can you tell me [218] where you are?

     CARTER. Ay, marry, can I; we are under heaven.

     SERVANT. Ay; but, Sir Saucebox, know you in what place?

     HORSE-COURSER. Ay, ay, the house is good enough to drink in.
     --Zouns, fill us some beer, or we'll break all the barrels in
     the house, and dash out all your brains with your bottles!

     FAUSTUS. Be not so furious:  come, you shall have beer.--
     My lord, beseech you give me leave a while;
     I'll gage my credit 'twill content your grace.

     DUKE. With all my heart, kind doctor; please thyself;
     Our servants and our court's at thy command.

     FAUSTUS. I humbly thank your grace.--Then fetch some beer.

     HORSE-COURSER. Ay, marry, there spake [219] a doctor, indeed!
     and, faith, I'll drink a health to thy wooden leg for that word.

     FAUSTUS. My wooden leg! what dost thou mean by that?

     CARTER. Ha, ha, ha!--Dost hear him, [220] Dick? he has forgot his
     leg.

     HORSE-COURSER. Ay, ay, he does not stand much upon that.

     FAUSTUS. No, faith; not much upon a wooden leg.

     CARTER. Good Lord, that flesh and blood should be so frail with
     your worship!  Do not you remember a horse-courser you sold a
     horse to?

     FAUSTUS. Yes, I remember I sold one a horse.

     CARTER. And do you remember you bid he should not ride him [221]
     into the water?

     FAUSTUS. Yes, I do very well remember that.

     CARTER. And do you remember nothing of your leg?

     FAUSTUS. No, in good sooth.

     CARTER. Then, I pray you, [222] remember your courtesy.

     FAUSTUS. I [223] thank you, sir.

     CARTER. 'Tis not so much worth.  I pray you, tell me one thing.

     FAUSTUS. What's that?

     CARTER. Be both your legs bed-fellows every night together?

     FAUSTUS. Wouldst thou make a Colossus of me, that thou askest me
     such questions?

     CARTER. No, truly, sir; I would make nothing of you; but I would
     fain know that.

          Enter HOSTESS with drink.

     FAUSTUS. Then, I assure thee certainly, they are.

     CARTER. I thank you; I am fully satisfied.

     FAUSTUS. But wherefore dost thou ask?

     CARTER. For nothing, sir:  but methinks you should have a wooden
     bed-fellow of one of 'em.

     HORSE-COURSER. Why, do you hear, sir? did not I [224] pull off
     one of your legs when you were asleep?

     FAUSTUS. But I have it again, now I am awake: look you here, sir.

     ALL. O, horrible! had the doctor three legs?

     CARTER. Do you remember, sir, how you cozened me, and eat up my
     load of----

          [FAUSTUS, in the middle of each speech, charms them dumb.]

     DICK. Do you remember how you made me wear an ape's----

     HORSE-COURSER. You whoreson conjuring scab, do you remember how
     you cozened me with a ho----

     ROBIN. Ha' [225] you forgotten me? you think to carry it away with
     your hey-pass and re-pass:  do you remember the dog's fa----
          [Exeunt CLOWNS.]

     HOSTESS. Who pays for the ale? hear you, Master Doctor; now you
     have sent away my guess, [226] I pray who shall pay me for my a----
          [Exit HOSTESS.]

     DUCHESS. My lord,
     We are much beholding [227] to this learned man.

     DUKE. So are we, madam; which we will recompense
     With all the love and kindness that we may:
     His artful sport [228] drives all sad thoughts away.
          [Exeunt.]

          Thunder and lightning.  Enter DEVILS with covered dishes;
          MEPHISTOPHILIS leads them into FAUSTUS'S study; then enter
          WAGNER.

     WAGNER. I think my master [229] means to die shortly; he has made
     his will, and given me his wealth, his house, his goods, [230] and
     store of golden plate, besides two thousand ducats ready-coined.
     I wonder what he means:  if death were nigh, he would not frolic
     thus.  He's now at supper with the scholars, where there's such
     belly-cheer as Wagner in his life ne'er [231] saw the like:  and,
     see where they come! belike the feast is ended. [232]
          [Exit.]

          Enter FAUSTUS, MEPHISTOPHILIS, and two or three SCHOLARS.

     FIRST SCHOLAR. Master Doctor Faustus, since our conference
     about fair ladies, which was the beautifulest in all the world,
     we have determined with ourselves that Helen of Greece was the
     admirablest lady that ever lived:  therefore, Master Doctor, if
     you will do us so much favour as to let us see that peerless
     dame of Greece, whom all the world admires for majesty, we should
     think ourselves much beholding unto you.

     FAUSTUS. Gentlemen,
     For that I know your friendship is unfeign'd,
     It is not Faustus' custom to deny
     The just request of those that wish him well:
     You shall behold that peerless dame of Greece,
     No otherwise for pomp or majesty
     Than when Sir Paris cross'd the seas with her,
     And brought the spoils to rich Dardania.
     Be silent, then, for danger is in words.

          Music sounds.  MEPHISTOPHILIS brings in HELEN; she passeth
          over the stage.

     SECOND SCHOLAR. Was this fair Helen, whose admired worth
     Made Greece with ten years' war [233] afflict poor Troy?

     THIRD SCHOLAR. Too simple is my wit [234] to tell her worth,
     Whom all the world admires for majesty.

     FIRST SCHOLAR. Now we have seen the pride of Nature's work,
     We'll take our leaves:  and, for this blessed sight,
     Happy and blest be Faustus evermore!

     FAUSTUS. Gentlemen, farewell:  the same wish I to you.
          [Exeunt SCHOLARS.]

          Enter an OLD MAN.

     OLD MAN. O gentle Faustus, leave this damned art,
     This magic, that will charm thy soul to hell,
     And quite bereave thee of salvation!
     Though thou hast now offended like a man,
     Do not persever in it like a devil:
     Yet, yet thou hast an amiable soul,
     If sin by custom grow not into nature;
     Then, Faustus, will repentance come too late;
     Then thou art banish'd from the sight of heaven:
     No mortal can express the pains of hell.
     It may be, this my exhortation
     Seems harsh and all unpleasant:  let it not;
     For, gentle son, I speak it not in wrath,
     Or envy of thee, [235] but in tender love,
     And pity of thy future misery;
     And so have hope that this my kind rebuke,
     Checking thy body, may amend thy soul.

     FAUSTUS. Where art thou, Faustus? wretch, what hast thou done?
     Hell claims his right, and with a roaring voice
     Says, "Faustus, come; thine hour is almost come;"
     And Faustus now will come to do thee right.

          [MEPHISTOPHILIS gives him a dagger.]

     OLD MAN. O, stay, good Faustus, stay thy desperate steps!
     I see an angel hover o'er thy head,
     And, with a vial full of precious grace,
     Offers to pour the same into thy soul:
     Then call for mercy, and avoid despair.

     FAUSTUS. O friend, I feel
     Thy words to comfort my distressed soul!
     Leave me a while to ponder on my sins.

     OLD MAN. Faustus, I leave thee; but with grief of heart,
     Fearing the enemy of thy hapless soul.
          [Exit.]

     FAUSTUS. Accursed Faustus, wretch, what hast thou done?
     I do repent; and yet I do despair:
     Hell strives with grace for conquest in my breast:
     What shall I do to shun the snares of death?

     MEPHIST. Thou traitor, Faustus, I arrest thy soul
     For disobedience to my sovereign lord:
     Revolt, or I'll in piece-meal tear thy flesh.

     FAUSTUS. I do repent I e'er offended him.
     Sweet Mephistophilis, entreat thy lord
     To pardon my unjust presumption,
     And with my blood again I will confirm
     The former vow I made to Lucifer.

     MEPHIST. [236] Do it, then, Faustus, with unfeigned heart,
     Lest greater dangers do attend thy drift.

     FAUSTUS. Torment, sweet friend, that base and aged man,
     That durst dissuade me from thy Lucifer,
     With greatest torments [237] that our hell affords.

     MEPHIST. His faith is great; I cannot touch his soul;
     But what I may afflict [238] his body with
     I will attempt, which is but little worth.

     FAUSTUS. One thing, good servant, let me crave of thee,
     To glut the longing of my heart's desire,--
     That I may have unto my paramour
     That heavenly Helen which I saw of late,
     Whose sweet embraces may extinguish clean [239]
     Those thoughts that do dissuade me from my vow,
     And keep my oath [240] I made to Lucifer.

     MEPHIST. This, or what else my Faustus shall desire,
     Shall be perform'd in twinkling of an eye.

          Re-enter HELEN, passing over the stage between two CUPIDS.

     FAUSTUS. Was this the face that launch'd a thousand ships,
     And burnt the topless towers of Ilium?--
     Sweet Helen, make me immortal with a kiss.--
          [Kisses her.]
     Her lips suck forth my soul:  see, where it flies!--
     Come, Helen, come, give me my soul again.
     Here will I dwell, for heaven is in these lips,
     And all is dross that is not Helena.
     I will be Paris, and for love of thee,
     Instead of Troy, shall Wittenberg be sack'd;
     And I will combat with weak Menelaus,
     And wear thy colours on my plumed crest;
     Yea, I will wound Achilles in the heel,
     And then return to Helen for a kiss.
     O, thou art fairer than the evening [241] air
     Clad in the beauty of a thousand stars;
     Brighter art thou than flaming Jupiter
     When he appear'd to hapless Semele;
     More lovely than the monarch of the sky
     In wanton Arethusa's azur'd [242] arms;
     And none but thou shalt [243] be my paramour!
          [Exeunt.]

          Thunder. Enter LUCIFER, BELZEBUB, and MEPHISTOPHILIS.

     LUCIFER. Thus from infernal Dis do we ascend
     To view the subjects of our monarchy,
     Those souls which sin seals the black sons of hell;
     'Mong which, as chief, Faustus, we come to thee,
     Bringing with us lasting damnation
     To wait upon thy soul: the time is come
     Which makes it forfeit.

     MEPHIST. And, this gloomy night,
     Here, in this room, will wretched Faustus be.

     BELZEBUB. And here we'll stay,
     To mark him how he doth demean himself.

     MEPHIST. How should he but in desperate lunacy?
     Fond worldling, now his heart-blood dries with grief;
     His conscience kills it; and his [244] labouring brain
     Begets a world of idle fantasies
     To over-reach the devil; but all in vain;
     His store of pleasures must be sauc'd with pain.
     He and his servant Wagner are at hand;
     Both come from drawing Faustus' latest will.
     See, where they come!

          Enter FAUSTUS and WAGNER.

     FAUSTUS. Say, Wagner,--thou hast perus'd my will,--
     How dost thou like it?

     WAGNER. Sir, So wondrous well,
     As in all humble duty I do yield
     My life and lasting service for your love.

     FAUSTUS. Gramercy, [245] Wagner.

          Enter SCHOLARS.

     Welcome, Gentlemen.
          [Exit WAGNER.]

     FIRST SCHOLAR. Now, worthy Faustus, methinks your looks are chang'd.

     FAUSTUS. O, gentlemen!

     SECOND SCHOLAR. What ails Faustus?

     FAUSTUS. Ah, my sweet chamber-fellow, had I lived with thee,
     then had I lived still! but now must die eternally.  Look, sirs,
     comes he not? comes he not?

     FIRST SCHOLAR. O my dear Faustus, what imports this fear?

     SECOND SCHOLAR. Is all our pleasure turn'd to melancholy?

     THIRD SCHOLAR. He is not well with being over-solitary.

     SECOND SCHOLAR. If it be so, we'll have physicians,
     And Faustus shall be cur'd.

     THIRD SCHOLAR. 'Tis but a surfeit, sir; [246] fear nothing.

     FAUSTUS. A surfeit of deadly [247] sin, that hath damned both
     body and soul.

     SECOND SCHOLAR. Yet, Faustus, look up to heaven, and remember
     mercy is infinite.

     FAUSTUS. But Faustus' offence can ne'er be pardoned:  the serpent
     that tempted Eve may be saved, but not Faustus.  O gentlemen,
     hear me [248] with patience, and tremble not at my speeches!  Though
     my heart pant and quiver to remember that I have been a student
     here these thirty years, O, would I had never [249] seen Wittenberg,
     never read book! and what wonders I have done, all Germany can
     witness, yea, all the world; for which Faustus hath lost both
     Germany and the world, yea, heaven itself, heaven, the seat of
     God, the throne of the blessed, the kingdom of joy; and must
     remain in hell for ever, hell.  O, hell, for ever!  Sweet friends,
     what shall become of Faustus, being in hell for ever?

     SECOND SCHOLAR. Yet, Faustus, call on God.

     FAUSTUS. On God, whom Faustus hath abjured! on God, whom Faustus
     hath blasphemed!  O my God, I would weep! but the devil draws in
     my tears.  Gush forth blood, instead of tears! yea, life and soul!
     O, he stays my tongue!  I would lift up my hands; but see, they
     hold 'em, they hold 'em?  ('?' sic)

     ALL. Who, Faustus?

     FAUSTUS. Why, Lucifer and Mephistophilis.  O gentlemen, I gave
     them my soul for my cunning!

     ALL. O, God forbid!

     FAUSTUS. God forbade it, indeed; but Faustus hath done it:  for
     the vain pleasure of four-and-twenty years hath Faustus lost
     eternal joy and felicity.  I writ them a bill with mine own blood:
     the date is expired; this is the time, and he will fetch me.

     FIRST SCHOLAR. Why did not Faustus tell us of this before,
     that divines might have prayed for thee?

     FAUSTUS. Oft have I thought to have done so; but the devil
     threatened to tear me in pieces, if I named God, to fetch me
     body and soul, if I once gave ear to divinity:  and now 'tis [250]
     too late.  Gentlemen, away, lest you perish with me.

     SECOND SCHOLAR. O, what may we do to save Faustus?

     FAUSTUS. Talk not of me, but save yourselves, and depart.

     THIRD SCHOLAR. God will strengthen me; I will stay with Faustus.

     FIRST SCHOLAR. Tempt not God, sweet friend; but let us into the
     next room, and pray for him.

     FAUSTUS. Ay, pray for me, pray for me; and what noise soever
     you hear, come not unto me, for nothing can rescue me.

     SECOND SCHOLAR. Pray thou, and we will pray that God may have mercy
     upon thee.

     FAUSTUS. Gentlemen, farewell:  if I live till morning, I'll visit
     you; if not, Faustus is gone to hell.

     ALL. Faustus, farewell.
          [Exeunt SCHOLARS.]

     MEPHIST. Ay, Faustus, now thou hast no hope of heaven;
     Therefore despair; think only upon hell,
     For that must be thy mansion, there to dwell.

     FAUSTUS. O thou bewitching fiend, 'twas thy temptation
     Hath robb'd me of eternal happiness!

     MEPHIST. I do confess it, Faustus, and rejoice:
     'Twas I that, when thou wert i'the way to heaven,
     Damm'd up thy passage; when thou took'st the book
     To view the Scriptures, then I turn'd the leaves,
     And led thine eye. [251]
     What, weep'st thou? 'tis too late; despair!  Farewell:
     Fools that will laugh on earth must weep in hell.
          [Exit.] [252]

          Enter GOOD ANGEL and EVIL ANGEL at several doors.

     GOOD ANGEL. O Faustus, if thou hadst given ear to me,
     Innumerable joys had follow'd thee!
     But thou didst love the world.

     EVIL ANGEL. Gave ear to me,
     And now must taste hell-pains [253] perpetually.

     GOOD ANGEL. O, what will all thy riches, pleasures, pomps,
     Avail thee now?

     EVIL ANGEL. Nothing, but vex thee more,
     To want in hell, that had on earth such store.

     GOOD ANGEL. O, thou hast lost celestial happiness,
     Pleasures unspeakable, bliss without end
     Hadst thou affected sweet divinity,
     Hell or the devil had had no power on thee:
     Hadst thou kept on that way, Faustus, behold,
          [Music, while a throne descends.]
     In what resplendent glory thou hadst sit [254]
     In yonder throne, like those bright-shining saints,
     And triumph'd over hell!  That hast thou lost;
     And now, poor soul, must thy good angel leave thee:
     The jaws of hell are open [255] to receive thee.
          [Exit.  The throne ascends.]

     EVIL ANGEL. Now, Faustus, let thine eyes with horror stare
          [Hell is discovered.]
     Into that vast perpetual torture-house:
     There are the Furies tossing damned souls
     On burning forks; there bodies boil [256] in lead;
     There are live quarters broiling on the coals,
     That ne'er can die; this ever-burning chair
     Is for o'er-tortur'd souls to rest them in;
     These that are fed with sops of flaming fire,
     Were gluttons, and lov'd only delicates,
     And laugh'd to see the poor starve at their gates:
     But yet all these are nothing; thou shalt see
     Ten thousand tortures that more horrid be.

     FAUSTUS. O, I have seen enough to torture me!

     EVIL ANGEL. Nay, thou must feel them, taste the smart of all:
     He that loves pleasure must for pleasure fall:
     And so I leave thee, Faustus, till anon;
     Then wilt thou tumble in confusion.
          [Exit.  Hell disappears.--The clock strikes eleven.]

     FAUSTUS. O Faustus,
     Now hast thou but one bare hour to live,
     And then thou must be damn'd perpetually!
     Stand still, you ever-moving spheres of heaven,
     That time may cease, and midnight never come;
     Fair Nature's eye, rise, rise again, and make
     Perpetual day; or let this hour be but
     A year, a month, a week, a natural day,
     That Faustus may repent and save his soul!
     O lente, lente currite, noctis equi!
     The stars move still, time runs, the clock will strike,
     The devil will come, and Faustus must be damn'd.
     O, I'll leap up to heaven!--Who pulls me down?--
     See, where Christ's blood streams in the firmament! [257]
     One drop of blood will save me:  O my Christ!--
     Rend not my heart for naming of my Christ;
     Yet will I call on him:  O, spare me, Lucifer!--
     Where is it now? 'tis gone:
     And, see, a threatening arm, an [258] angry brow!
     Mountains and hills, come, come, and fall on me,
     And hide me from the heavy wrath of heaven!
     No!
     Then will I headlong run into the earth:
     Gape, earth!  O, no, it will not harbour me!
     You stars that reign'd at my nativity,
     Whose influence hath [259] allotted death and hell,
     Now draw up Faustus, like a foggy mist,
     Into the entrails of yon [260] labouring cloud[s],
     That, when you [261] vomit forth into the air,
     My limbs may issue from your smoky mouths;
     But let my soul mount and ascend to heaven!
          [The clock strikes the half-hour.]
     O, half the hour is past! 'twill all be past anon.
     O, if [262] my soul must suffer for my sin,
     Impose some end to my incessant pain;
     Let Faustus live in hell a thousand years,
     A hundred thousand, and at last [263] be sav'd!
     No end is limited to damned souls.
     Why wert thou not a creature wanting soul?
     Or why is this immortal that thou hast?
     O, Pythagoras' metempsychosis, were that true,
     This soul should fly from me, and I be chang'd
     Into some brutish beast! all beasts are happy,
     For, when they die,
     Their souls are soon dissolv'd in elements;
     But mine must live still to be plagu'd in hell.
     Curs'd be the parents that engender'd me!
     No, Faustus, curse thyself, curse Lucifer
     That hath depriv'd thee of the joys of heaven.
          [The clock strikes twelve.]
     It strikes, it strikes!  Now, body, turn to air,
     Or Lucifer will bear thee quick to hell!
     O soul, be chang'd into small water-drops,
     And fall into the ocean, ne'er be found!

          Thunder.  Enter DEVILS.

     O, mercy, heaven! look not so fierce on me!
     Adders and serpents, let me breathe a while!
     Ugly hell, gape not! come not, Lucifer!
     I'll burn my books!--O Mephistophilis!
          [Exeunt DEVILS with FAUSTUS.]

          Enter SCHOLARS. [264]

     FIRST SCHOLAR. Come, gentlemen, let us go visit Faustus,
     For such a dreadful night was never seen;
     Since first the world's creation did begin,
     Such fearful shrieks and cries were never heard:
     Pray heaven the doctor have escap'd the danger.

     SECOND SCHOLAR.
     O, help us, heaven! [265] see, here are Faustus' limbs,
     All torn asunder by the hand of death!

     THIRD SCHOLAR.
     The devils whom Faustus serv'd have [266] torn him thus;
     For, twixt the hours of twelve and one, methought,
     I heard him shriek and call aloud for help;
     At which self [267] time the house seem'd all on fire
     With dreadful horror of these damned fiends.

     SECOND SCHOLAR. Well, gentlemen, though Faustus' end be such
     As every Christian heart laments to think on,
     Yet, for he was a scholar once admir'd
     For wondrous knowledge in our German schools,
     We'll give his mangled limbs due burial;
     And all the students, cloth'd in mourning black,
     Shall wait upon his heavy funeral.
          [Exeunt.]

          Enter CHORUS.

     CHORUS. Cut is the branch that might have grown full straight,
     And burned is Apollo's laurel-bough,
     That sometime grew within this learned man.
     Faustus is gone:  regard his hellish fall,
     Whose fiendful fortune may exhort the wise,
     Only to wonder at unlawful things,
     Whose deepness doth entice such forward wits
     To practise more than heavenly power permits.
          [Exit.]

     Terminat hora diem; terminat auctor opus.




FOOTNOTES:


[Footnote 1: Carthagens: So 4tos 1616, 1624, (and compare 4to 1604,
p. 79).--2to 1631 "Carthagen."

     p. 79. (Doctor Faustus, from the quarto of 1604):

    "Where Mars did mate the Carthaginians;" ]

[Footnote 2: her: Old eds. "his."]

[Footnote 3: of: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "and."]

[Footnote 4: upon: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624,  1631,  "on the."]

[Footnote 5: thousand: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "diuers."]

[Footnote 6: them: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "men."]

[Footnote 7: legatur: Old eds. "legatus."]

[Footnote 8: petty: I may notice that 4to 1604 has "pretty," which is
perhaps the right reading.]

[Footnote 9: &c.: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--Not in 4to 1616.]

[Footnote 10: circles, scenes, letters, and characters: So 4to 1604 (see
note , p. 80).--The later 4tos "circles, letters, characters."

     Note , from p. 80. (Doctor Faustus, from the quarto of 1604):

    "scenes: "And sooner may a gulling weather-spie
              By drawing forth heavens SCEANES tell certainly," &c.
                   Donne's FIRST SATYRE,--p. 327, ed. 1633." ]

[Footnote 11: gain: So 4tos 1624, 1631 (and so 4to 1604).--2to 1616 "get."]

[Footnote 12: these: See note , p. 80.

     Note , from p. 80. (Doctor Faustus, from the quarto of 1604):

    "these elements: So again, "Within the bowels of THESE
     elements," &c.,  on  p. 87, first col,--"THESE" being
     equivalent to THE.  (Not unfrequently in our old writers
     THESE is little more than redundant.)" ]

[Footnote 13: enterprise: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "enterprises."]

[Footnote 14: make swift Rhine circle fair: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631,
"WITH swift Rhine circle ALL."]

[Footnote 15: silk: Old eds. "skill."]

[Footnote 16: blest: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "wise."]

[Footnote 17: Swarm: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--2to 1616 "Sworne."]

[Footnote 18: to: So 4to 1616.--Not in 4tos 1624, 1631.]

[Footnote 19: have: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--2to 1616 "has."]

[Footnote 20: shall they: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "they shall."]

[Footnote 21: huge: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "whole."]

[Footnote 22: stuffs: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--2to 1616 "stuff'd."]

[Footnote 23: renowm'd: So 4to 1616 (See note ||, p. 11).--2tos 1624,
1631, "renown'd."

     Note ||, from p. 11. (The First Part of Tamburlaine the
     Great):

    "renowmed: i.e. renowned.--So the 8vo.--The 4to "renowned."
     --The form "RENOWMED" (Fr. RENOMME) occurs repeatedly
     afterwards in this play, according to the 8vo.  It is
     occasionally found in writers posterior to Marlowe's
     time.  e.g.
       "Of Constantines great towne RENOUM'D in vaine."
            Verses to King James, prefixed to Lord Stirling's
            MONARCHICKE TRAGEDIES, ed. 1607." ]

[Footnote 24: Albertus': Old eds. "Albanus."]

[Footnote 25: that: So 4tos 1616, 1624.--2to 1631 "the."]

[Footnote 26: him: So 4to 1616.--Not in 4tos 1624, 1631.]

[Footnote 27: Enter Faustus: Old eds. "Thunder.  Enter Lucifer and
4 deuils, Faustus to them with this speech,"--wrongly.]

[Footnote 28: her: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "his."]

[Footnote 29: erring: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--2to 1616 "euening."]

[Footnote 30: Mephistophilis Dragon, quod tumeraris: See note *, p. 83.

     Note *, from p. 83. (Doctor Faustus, from the quarto of 1604):

    "surgat Mephistophilis, quod tumeraris: The later 4tos have
     "surgat Mephistophilis DRAGON, quod tumeraris."--There is a
     corruption here, which seems to defy emendation.  For "quod
     TUMERARIS," Mr. J. Crossley, of Manchester, would read
     (rejecting the word "Dragon") "quod TU MANDARES" (the
     construction being "quod tu mandares ut Mephistophilis
     appareat et surgat"):  but the "tu" does not agree with the
     preceding "vos."--The Revd. J. Mitford proposes "surgat
     Mephistophilis, per Dragon (or Dagon) quod NUMEN EST AERIS."" ]

[Footnote 31: dicatus: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--2to 1616 "dicatis."]

[Footnote 32: came hither: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--2to 1616 "came NOW hether."]

[Footnote 33: speeches: So 4to 1604.--Not in the later 4tos.]

[Footnote 34: accidens: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--2to 1616 "accident."]

[Footnote 35: fell: So 4to 1604.--The later 4tos "liue."]

[Footnote 36: strike: So 4to 1631.--2tos 1616, 1624, "strikes."]

[Footnote 37: thorough: So 4to 1631.--2tos 1616, 1624, "through."]

[Footnote 38: Sirrah: So 4to 1616.--Not in 4tos 1624, 1631.]

[Footnote 39: save: So 4tos 1616, 1624.--2to 1631 "spare."]

[Footnote 40: again: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--Not in 4to 1616.]

[Footnote 41: or: Old eds. "for."]

[Footnote 42: vestigiis nostris: Old eds. "vestigias nostras."]

[Footnote 43: backward: So 4to 1616 (and so 4to 1604).--2tos 1624, 1631,
"backe."]

[Footnote 44: Why: So 4to 1616 (and so 4to 1604).--Not in 4tos 1624, 1631.]

[Footnote 45: that famous: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "that MOST famous."]

[Footnote 46: of: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "be."]

[Footnote 47: men: So 4tos 1624, 1631 (and so 4to 1604).--2to 1616 "them."]

[Footnote 48: Mephistophile: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "Mephostophilis."]

[Footnote 49: thee: So 4to 1604.--The later 4tos "him."]

[Footnote 50: thine: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--2to 1616 "thy."]

[Footnote 51: And: So 4to 1616.--Not in 4tos 1624, 1631.]

[Footnote 52: my: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "thy."]

[Footnote 53: Is it: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "It is."]

[Footnote 54: soul: So 4to 1616.--Not in 4tos 1624, 1631.]

[Footnote 55: an: So 4tos 1616, 1631.--Not in 4to 1624.]

[Footnote 56: should: So 4tos 1616, 1624.--2to 1631 "shall."]

[Footnote 57: God: So 4to 1604.--The later 4tos "heauen."]

[Footnote 58: this scroll: So 4to 1616.--Not in 4tos 1624, 1631.]

[Footnote 59: he desires: Not in the 4tos.  See note , p. 86.

     Note , from p. 86. (Doctor Faustus, from the quarto of 1604):

    "he desires: Not in any of the four 4tos.  In the tract just
     cited,  i.e. THE HISTORY OF DOCTOR FAUSTUS, ed. 1648.  the
     "3d Article" stands thus,--"That Mephostophiles should bring
     him any thing, and doe for him whatsoever."  Sig. A 4, ed.
     1648.  A later ed. adds "he desired."  Marlowe, no doubt,
     followed some edition of the HISTORY in which these words,
     or something equivalent to them, had been omitted by mistake.
     (2to 1661, which I consider as of no authority, has "he
     requireth.")" ]


[Footnote 60: and: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--Not in 4to 1616.]

[Footnote 61: with: So 4to 1604.--Not in the later 4tos.]

[Footnote 62: the: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "that."]

[Footnote 63: are: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--2to 1616 "is."]

[Footnote 64: hell's a fable: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "hell's a
MEERE fable."]

[Footnote 65: thine: So 4tos 1616, 1624.--2to 1631 "thy."]

[Footnote 66: thy: So 4tos 1616, 1631.--2to 1624 "thine."]

[Footnote 67: was: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "were."]

[Footnote 68: harness: i.e. armour.]

[Footnote 69: This will I keep as chary as my life.
          [Exeunt.:

          Enter FAUSTUS, in his study, and MEPHISTOPHILIS.

     FAUSTUS. When I behold the heavens, &c.:

Old eds. (that is, 4tos 1616, 1624, 1631) thus;

"This will I keepe, as chary as my life.
     [Exeunt.:

     Enter WAGNER solus.

WAGNER. Learned Faustus
To know the secrets of Astronomy
Grauen in the booke of Joues high firmament,
Did mount himselfe to scale Olympus top,
Being seated in a chariot burning bright,
Drawne by the strength of yoaky [2to 1624 "yoaked": Dragons necks,
He now is gone to proue Cosmography,
And as I gesse will first arriue at Rome,
To see the Pope and manner of his Court;
And take some part of holy Peters feast,
That to [2tos 1624, 1631, "on": this day is highly solemnized.
     Exit WAGNER.

     Enter FAUSTUS in his Study, and MEPHISTOPHILIS.

FAUSTUS. When I behold the heauens," &c.

The lines which I have here omitted belong to a subsequent part
of the play, where they will be found with considerable additions,
and are rightly assigned to the CHORUS.  (As given in the present
place by the 4tos 1616, 1624, 1631, these lines exhibit the text
of the earlier FAUSTUS; see p. 90, sec. col.) It would seem that
something was intended to intervene here between the exit of Faustus
and Mephistophilis, and their re-appearance on the stage:  compare,
however, the preceding play, p. 88, first col.


     p. 90, sec. col. (Doctor Faustus, from the quarto of 1604):

    "FAUSTUS. Great thanks, mighty Lucifer!
     This will I keep as chary as my life.

     LUCIFER. Farewell, Faustus, and think on the devil.

     FAUSTUS. Farewell, great Lucifer.
          [Exeunt LUCIFER and BELZEBUB.:

     Come, Mephistophilis.
          [Exeunt.:

          Enter CHORUS.

     CHORUS. Learned Faustus,
     To know the secrets of astronomy
     Graven in the book of Jove's high firmament,
     Did mount himself to scale Olympus' top,
     Being seated in a chariot burning bright,
     Drawn by the strength of yoky dragons' necks.
     He now is gone to prove cosmography,
     And, as I guess, will first arrive at Rome,
     To see the Pope and manner of his court,
     And take some part of holy Peter's feast,
     That to this day is highly solemniz'd.
          [Exit.:

          Enter FAUSTUS and MEPHISTOPHILIS.

     FAUSTUS. Having now, my good Mephistophilis,
     Pass'd with delight the stately town of Trier," etc.


     p. 88, first col. (Doctor Faustus, from the quarto of 1604):

     This part of the play does not have any relevance to characters
     leaving the stage and re-entering.


     Perhaps the editor meant p. 93, first column.

     p. 93, first col. (Doctor Faustus, from the quarto of 1604):

    "RALPH. O, brave, Robin! shall I have Nan Spit, and to mine
     own use?  On that condition I'll feed thy devil with horse-
     bread as long as he lives, of free cost.

     ROBIN. No more, sweet Ralph:  let's go and make clean our
     boots, which lie foul upon our hands, and then to our conjuring
     in the devil's name.
          [Exeunt.:

          Enter ROBIN and RALPH with a silver goblet.

     ROBIN. Come, Ralph:  did not I tell thee, we were for ever
     made by this Doctor Faustus' book? ecce, signum! here's a
     simple purchase for horse-keepers:  our horses shall eat
     no hay as long as this lasts.

     RALPH. But, Robin, here comes the Vintner." ]

[Footnote 70: thine: So 4tos 1616, 1624.--2to 1631 "thy."]

[Footnote 71: is: So 4to 1616.--Not in 4tos 1624, 1631.]

[Footnote 72: breathes: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--2to 1616 "breathe."]

[Footnote 73: ears: So 4tos 1616, 1631.--2to 1624 "eare."]

[Footnote 74: this I: So 4tos 1616, 1631.--2to 1624 "this TIME I."]

[Footnote 75: termine: I may notice that 4to 1604 (see p. 88, sec. col.)
has "terminine," which at least is better for the metre.

     p. 88, second column, (Doctor Faustus, from the quarto of 1604):

    "Whose terminine is term'd the world's wide pole;" ]

[Footnote 76: erring: So 4to 1604.--The later 4tos "euening."]

[Footnote 77: motion: So 4tos 1616, 1631.--2to 1624 "motions."]

[Footnote 78: Ay: So 4to 1616.--Not in 4tos 1624, 1631.]

[Footnote 79: and: So 4to 1631.--Not in 4tos 1616, 1624.]

[Footnote 80: the: So 4tos 1616, 1631.--Not in 4to 1624.]

[Footnote 81: lips: So 4to 1604.--Not in the later 4tos.]

[Footnote 82: and ever since have run: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631,
"and HAUE EUER SINCE run."]

[Footnote 83: this: So 4to 1604.--The later 4tos "these."]

[Footnote 84: come: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "came."]

[Footnote 85: I: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--2to 1616 "I I."]

[Footnote 86: L: Old eds. "Lechery." See note , p. 90.

     Note , from p. 90. (Doctor Faustus, from the quarto of 1604):

    "L.: All the 4tos "Lechery."--Here I have made the alteration
     recommended by Mr. Collier in his Preface to COLERIDGE'S
     SEVEN LECTURES ON SHAKESPEARE AND MILTON, p. cviii." ]

[Footnote 87: Tut: So 4to 1604.--The later 4tos "But."]

[Footnote 88: Robin: Old eds. "the Clowne" (and so frequently afterwards):
but he is evidently a distinct person from the "Clown," Wagner's
attendant, who has previously appeared (see p. 111). Most probably
the parts of the Clown and Robin were played by the same actor;
and hence the confusion in the old eds.

     P. 111. (this play):

          "Enter WAGNER and CLOWN.

     WAGNER. Come hither, sirrah boy." etc. ]

[Footnote 89: faith: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631 "i'faith." (And so
afterwards in this scene.)]

[Footnote 90: not tell: So 4to 1616.--Not in 4tos 1624, 1631.]

[Footnote 91: as fair a: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "a faire."]

[Footnote 92: need'st: So 4tos 1616, 1624.--2to 1631 "needs."]

[Footnote 93: hold, belly, hold: Compare Florio's DICT., 1611; "IOSA,
GOOD STORE, hold-bellie-hold."]

[Footnote 94: Prithee: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "I prithee."]

[Footnote 95: him: So 4tos 1616, 1624.--Not in 4to 1631.]

[Footnote 96: He views: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "To view."]

[Footnote 97: with this: So 4tos 1616, 1631.--2to 1624 "with HIS." This
passage is sufficiently obscure.]

[Footnote 98: round: So 4to 1616.--Not in 4tos 1624, 1631.]

[Footnote 99: Rhine: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--2to 1616 "Rhines."]

[Footnote 100: up to: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "vnto."]

[Footnote 101: Quarter the town in four equivalents: So 4to 1604.--Not
in the later 4tos.]

[Footnote 102: Thorough: so 4to 1631.--2tos 1616, 1624, "Through."]

[Footnote 103: rest: So 4to 1604.--The later 4tos "East."]

[Footnote 104: me: So 4tos 1616, 1631.--Not in 4to 1624.]

[Footnote 105: us: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "you."]

[Footnote 106: through: So 4tos 1616, 1624.--2to 1631 "thorow."]

[Footnote 107: Ponte: Old eds. "Ponto."]

[Footnote 108: match: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--2to 1616 "watch."]

[Footnote 109: the: so 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "those."]

[Footnote 110: in state and: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--2to 1616 "this day with."]

[Footnote 111: whilst: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "while."]

[Footnote 112: thorough: So 4to 1631.--2tos 1616, 1624, "through."]

[Footnote 113: my: Qy. "one"?]

[Footnote 114: cunning: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--2to 1616 "comming." (And so
in the fourth line of the next speech.)]

[Footnote 115: this: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "his."]

[Footnote 116: at: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "to."]

[Footnote 117: it: So 4to 1616.--Not in 4tos 1624, 1631.]

[Footnote 118: And smite with death thy hated enterprise: So 4to 1616.
--Not in 4tos 1624, 1631.]

[Footnote 119: our: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "the."]

[Footnote 120: this: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "the."]

[Footnote 121: have right: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--2to 1616 "haue SOME right."]

[Footnote 122: shall: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--2to 1616 "shalt."]

[Footnote 123: hath: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--2to 1616 "haue."]

[Footnote 124: synod: Qy. "HOLY synod"?]

[Footnote 125: Ponte: Old eds. "Ponto."]

[Footnote 126: his: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "this."]

[Footnote 127: Sennet: Old eds. "Senit" and "Sonet". See note ||, p. 91.

     Note ||, from p. 91. (Doctor Faustus, from the quarto of 1604):

    "Sonnet: Variously written, SENNET, SIGNET, SIGNATE, &c.--A
     particular set of notes on the trumpet, or cornet, different
     from a flourish.  See Nares's GLOSS. in V. SENNET." ]

[Footnote 128: be: So 4tos 1616, 1624.--2to 1631 "are."]

[Footnote 129: them to: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "them FORTH to."]

[Footnote 130: Archbishop.: Old eds. "Bish." and "Bishop" (and so afterwards).]

[Footnote 131: you: So 4tos 1616, 1631.--Not in 4to 1624.]

[Footnote 132: beholding: So 4to 1616 (see note , p. 98).--2tos 1624,
1631, "beholden."

     Note , from p. 98. (Doctor Faustus, from the quarto of 1604):

    "beholding: i.e. beholden." ]

[Footnote 133: such: So 4tos 1616, 1631.--2to 1624 "this."]

[Footnote 134: it: So 4to 1616.--Not in 4tos 1624, 1631.]

[Footnote 135: his: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--2to 1616 "this."]

[Footnote 136: struck: Here the old eds. have "stroke" and "strooke:"
but in the next clause they all agree in having "strucke."]

[Footnote 137: on: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--Not in 4to 1616.]

[Footnote 138: same: So 4tos 1616, 1624.--Not in 4to 1631.]

[Footnote 139: at the hard heels: The modern editors, ignorant of the old
phraseology, thought that they corrected this passage in printing
"hard at the heels."]

[Footnote 140: Vintner: So all the old eds.; and presently Robin addresses
this person as "vintner:" yet Dick has just spoken of him as "the
Vintner's boy." See note ||, p. 93.

     Note ||, from p. 93. (Doctor Faustus, from the quarto of 1604):

    "Drawer: There is an inconsistency here:  the Vintner cannot
     properly be addressed as "Drawer."  The later 4tos are also
     inconsistent in the corresponding passage:  Dick says, "THE
     VINTNER'S BOY follows us at the hard heels," and immediately
     the "VINTNER" enters." ]

[Footnote 141: your: So 4tos 1616, 1631.--Not in 4to 1624.]

[Footnote 142: much: Equivalent to--by no means, not at all.  This ironical
exclamation is very common in our old dramatists.  (Mr. Hunter,
--NEW ILLUST. OF SHAKESPEARE, ii. 56,--explains it very differently.)]

[Footnote 143: By lady: i.e. By our Lady.]

[Footnote 144: to: So 4tos 1616, 1624.--Not in 4to 1631.]

[Footnote 145: tester: i.e. sixpence.]

[Footnote 146: the state: i.e. the raised chair or throne, with a canopy.]

[Footnote 147: perfect: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--2to 1616 "warlike."]

[Footnote 148: rouse: i.e. bumper.]

[Footnote 149: a: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "ten."]

[Footnote 150: a: So 4tos 1616, 1624.--2to 1631 "the."]

[Footnote 151: renowm'd: Old eds. "renown'd"; but earlier, p. 109, first
col., 4to 1616 has "renowm'd":  see note 23  and see note ||, p. 11.

     Note ||, from p. 11. (The First Part of Tamburlaine the
     Great):

    "renowmed: i.e. renowned.--So the 8vo.--The 4to "renowned."
     --The form "RENOWMED" (Fr. RENOMME) occurs repeatedly
     afterwards in this play, according to the 8vo.  It is
     occasionally found in writers posterior to Marlowe's
     time.  e.g.
       "Of Constantines great towne RENOUM'D in vaine."
            Verses to King James, prefixed to Lord Stirling's
            MONARCHICKE TRAGEDIES, ed. 1607." ]

[Footnote 152: through: So 4tos 1616, 1624.--2to 1631 "thorow."]

[Footnote 153: These: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "Those."]

[Footnote 154: through: So 4tos 1616, 1624.--2to 1631 "thorow."]

[Footnote 155: a: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--Not in 4to 1616.]

[Footnote 156: this: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "the."]

[Footnote 157: demand: So 4tos 1616, 1631.--2to 1624 "demands."]

[Footnote 158: door: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--Not in 4to 1616.]

[Footnote 159: state: See note , p. 122. i.e. note 146--So 4tos 1616,
1631.--2to 1624 "seat."]

[Footnote 160: These: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "They."]

[Footnote 161: renowmed: Old eds. "renowned." See note , p. 123.
 i.e. note 151 ]

[Footnote 162: thoughts: So 4tos 1616, 1631.--2to 1624 "thought."]

[Footnote 163: whilst: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "while."]

[Footnote 164: I gain'd: So 4tos 1616, 1631.--2to 1624 "I HAD gain'd."]

[Footnote 165: at window: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "at THE window."]

[Footnote 166: is: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--Not in 4to 1616.]

[Footnote 167: this is: So 4to 1624 (and rightly, as the next line
proves).--2tos 1616, 1631, "is this."]

[Footnote 168: As: So 4to 1616.--2to 1624 "That."--2to 1631 "And."]

[Footnote 169: Belimoth....Asteroth: Old eds. here "Belimote (and "Belimot")
....Asterote":  but see p. 126, first col.

     P. 126. (this play):

    "But wherefore do I dally my revenge?--
     Asteroth, Belimoth, Mephistophilis?" ]

[Footnote 170: has: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "hath."]

[Footnote 171: horns: So 4tos 1616, 1631.--2to 1624 "horne."]

[Footnote 172: sir: So 4tos 1616, 1631.--Not in 4to 1624.]

[Footnote 173: of: i.e. on.]

[Footnote 174: sway: So 4tos 1616, 1631.--2to 1624 "stay."]

[Footnote 175: this attempt against the conjurer: See note, * p. 95.

     Note *, from p. 95. (Doctor Faustus, from the quarto of 1604):

    "Mephistophilis, transform him straight: According to THE
     HISTORY OF DR. FAUSTUS, the knight was not present during
     Faustus's "conference" with the Emperor; nor did he offer
     the doctor any insult by doubting his skill in magic.  We
     are there told that Faustus happening to see the knight
     asleep, "leaning out of a window of the great hall," fixed
     a huge pair of hart's horns on his head; "and, as the knight
     awaked, thinking to pull in his head, he hit his hornes
     against the glasse, that the panes thereof flew about his
     eares:  thinke here how this good gentleman was vexed, for
     he could neither get backward nor forward."  After the emperor
     and the courtiers, to their great amusement, had beheld the
     poor knight in this condition, Faustus removed the horns.
     When Faustus, having taken leave of the emperor, was a league
     and a half from the city, he was attacked in a wood by the
     knight and some of his companions:  they were in armour, and
     mounted on fair palfreys; but the doctor quickly overcame
     them by turning all the bushes into horsemen, and "so
     charmed them, that every one, knight and other, for the
     space of a whole moneth, did weare a paire of goates
     hornes on their browes, and every palfry a paire of oxe
     hornes on his head; and this was their penance appointed
     by Faustus."  A second attempt of the knight to revenge
     himself on Faustus proved equally unsuccessful.  Sigs. G 2,
     I 3, ed. 1648." ]

[Footnote 176: that: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "the."]

[Footnote 177: my: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "thy."]

[Footnote 178: that: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "the."]

[Footnote 179: an: So 4to 1616.--Not in 4tos 1624, 1631.]

[Footnote 180:  boldly: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "brauely."]

[Footnote 181: heart's: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--2to 1616 "heart."]

[Footnote 182: that: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "the."]

[Footnote 183: the: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "that."]

[Footnote 184: now: so 4to 1616.--Not in 4tos 1624, 1631.]

[Footnote 185: art: Old eds. "heart" (which, after all, may be right).]

[Footnote 186: there: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--2to 1616 "here."]

[Footnote 187: his: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--Not in 3to sic  1616.]

[Footnote 188: pull: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--2to 1616 "put."]

[Footnote 189: all: Old eds. "call."]

[Footnote 190: through: So 4tos 1616, 1624.--2to 1631 "thorow."]

[Footnote 191: Amongst: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "Among."]

[Footnote 192: Enter the ambushed Soldiers: Here (though it seems that
Faustus does not quit the stage) a change of scene is supposed.]

[Footnote 193: these: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "the."]

[Footnote 194: the door: i.e. the stage-door,--the writer here addressing
himself to THE ACTOR only, for the scene lies in a wood.]

[Footnote 195: Zounds: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--2to 1616, "Zons."]

[Footnote 196: all are: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "are all."]

[Footnote 197: these: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--2to 1616 "this."]

[Footnote 198: escape: So 4tos 1616, 1631.--2to 1624 "scape."]

[Footnote 199: has: So 4tos 1616, 1624.--2to 1631 "hath."]

[Footnote 200: you: So 4to 1616.--Not in 4tos 1624, 1631.]

[Footnote 201: guess: A corruption of guests (very frequent in our early
dramatists) which occurs again at p. 130. first col.  So 4to
1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "guests."   See note 226. ]

[Footnote 202: thou: So 4to 1616.--Not in 4tos 1624, 1631.]

[Footnote 203: now: So 4to 1616.--Not in 4tos 1624, 1631.]

[Footnote 204: sir: Qy. "sirs"? but see the next speech of the Carter,
and the next speech but one of the Horse-courser, who, in his
narrative, uses both "sirs" and "sir."]

[Footnote 205: As I was going to Wittenberg, t'other day, &c.: See THE
HISTORY OF DOCTOR FAUSTUS, Chap. xxxv,--"How Doctor Faustus eat
a load of hay."--The Carter does not appear in the earlier play.]

[Footnote 206: my: So 4to 1616.--Not in 4tos 1624, 1631.]

[Footnote 207: cursen: i.e. christened.]

[Footnote 208: some quality: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "some RARE
quality."]

[Footnote 209: rid: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "ride."]

[Footnote 210: that enchanted castle in the air: This is not mentioned in
the earlier play:  but see THE HISTORY OF DOCTOR FAUSTUS, Chap xl,
--"How Doctor Faustus through his charmes made a great Castle in
presence of the Duke of Anholt."]

[Footnote 211: delighted: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "delighteth."]

[Footnote 212: it pleaseth: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "it HATH PLEASED."]

[Footnote 213: come: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "came."]

[Footnote 214: these ripe grapes: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "these
grapes."]

[Footnote 215: The Clowns bounce, &c: 2to 1616 "The CLOWNE bounce." 2tos
1624, 1631, "The CLOWNE BOUNCETH." (In the next stage-direction
all the 4tos have "THEY knock again," &c.)]

[Footnote 216: for: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "to."]

[Footnote 217: pardons: So 4tos 1616, 1631.--2to 1624 "pardon."]

[Footnote 218: me: So 4to 1616.--Not in 4tos 1624, 1631.]

[Footnote 219: spake: So 4tos 1616, 1631.--2to 1624 "spoke."]

[Footnote 220: Dost hear him: So 4to 1616.--2to 1624 "dost THOU heare ME."
2to 1631 "dost THOU heare him."]

[Footnote 221: him: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--Not in 4to 1616.]

[Footnote 222: you: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--Not in 4to 1616 (but compare the
Carter's next speech).]

[Footnote 223: I: So 4to 1616.--Not in 4tos 1624, 1631.]

[Footnote 224: not I: So 4tos 1616, 1631.--2to 1624 "I not."]

[Footnote 225: Ha': So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "Haue."]

[Footnote 226: guess: See note , p. 127.  i.e. note 201   So 4to 1616.
--2tos 1624, 1631, "guests."]

[Footnote 227: beholding: So 4tos 1616, 1624, (see note , p. 98).--2to
1631 "beholden."

     Note , from p. 98. (Doctor Faustus, from the quarto of 1604):

    "beholding: i.e. beholden." ]

[Footnote 228: sport: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "sports."

[Footnote 229: I think my master, &c.: The alterations which this speech
has undergone will hardly admit of its arrangement as verse:
compare the earlier play, p. 98, first col.

     p. 98, first col. (Doctor Faustus, from the quarto of 1604):

         "Enter WAGNER.

     WAGNER. I think my master means to die shortly,
     For he hath given to me all his goods:
     And yet, methinks, if that death were near,
     He would not banquet, and carouse, and swill
     Amongst the students, as even now he doth,
     Who are at supper with such belly-cheer
     As Wagner ne'er beheld in all his life.
     See, where they come! belike the feast is ended.
          [Exit.:" ]


[Footnote 230: goods: So 4tos 1616, 1631.--2to 1624 "good."]

[Footnote 231: ne'er: so 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "neuer."]

[Footnote 232: ended: so 4tos 1624, 1631, (and so 4to 1604).--2to 1616 "done."]

[Footnote 233: war: Old eds. "warres."]

[Footnote 234: wit: So 4tos 1616, 1624.--2to 1631 "will."]

[Footnote 235: Or envy of thee: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "Or OF enuie
TO thee."]

[Footnote 236: MEPHIST.: This and the next prefix are omitted in the old
eds.]

[Footnote 237: torments: So 4tos 1624, 1631 (and so 4to 1604).--2to 1616
"torment."]

[Footnote 238: I may afflict: So 4to 1616.--2to 1624 "I afflict."--2to
1631 "I CAN afflict."]

[Footnote 239: clean: So 4to 1604.--The later 4tos "clear."]

[Footnote 240: oath: So 4to 1604.--The later 4tos "vow."]

[Footnote 241: evening: So 4to 1604.--The later 4tos "euenings."]

[Footnote 242: azur'd: So 4to 1624 (a reading which I prefer only because
it is also that of 4to 1604.)--2tos 1616, 1631, "azure."]

[Footnote 243: shalt: See note *, p. 100.]

     Note *, from p. 100. (Doctor Faustus, from the quarto of 1604):

    "shalt: So all the 4tos; and so I believe Marlowe wrote,
     though the grammar requires "shall."" ]

[Footnote 244: his: So 4tos 1616, 1631.--Not in 4to 1624.]

[Footnote 245: Gramercy: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--2to 1616 "Gramercies."]

[Footnote 246: sir: So 4tos 1616, 1624.--Not in 4to 1631.]

[Footnote 247: of deadly: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "of A deadly."]

[Footnote 248: me: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--Not in 4to 1616.]

[Footnote 249: never: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "nere."]

[Footnote 250: 'tis: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "IT is."]

[Footnote 251: And led thine eye: A portion of this line has evidently
dropt out.]

[Footnote 252: Exit: It seems doubtful whether Lucifer and Belzebub should
also make their exeunt here, or whether they remain to witness
the catastrophe:  see p. 132, first col.

     P. 132, first column. (this play):

    "MEPHIST. And, this gloomy night,
     Here, in this room, will wretched Faustus be.

     BELZEBUB. And here we'll stay,
     To mark him how he doth demean himself." etc. ]

[Footnote 253: hell-pains: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--2to 1616 "HELS paines."]

[Footnote 254: sit: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--2to 1616 "set."]

[Footnote 255: are open: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "IS READIE."]

[Footnote 256: boil: So 4tos 1624, 1631.--2to 1616 "BROYLE."]

[Footnote 257: See, where Christ's blood streams in the firmament: So 4tos
1624, 1631.--Not in 4to 1616.]

[Footnote 258: an: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "and."]

[Footnote 259: hath: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "haue."]

[Footnote 260: yon: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "your."]

[Footnote 261: you, &c.: See note *, p. 101.]

     Note *, from p. 101. (Doctor Faustus, from the quarto of 1604):

    "That, when you, &c.: So all the old eds.; and it is certain
     that awkward changes of person are sometimes found in passages
     of our early poets:  but qy.,--
         "That, when THEY vomit forth into the air,
          My limbs may issue from THEIR smoky mouths," &c.?" ]

[Footnote 262: 0, if, &c.: 2to 1604, in the corresponding passage, has
"Oh, GOD, if," &c. (see p. 101, sec. col.), and that reading
seems necessary for the sense.

     P. 101, sec. col. (Doctor Faustus, from the quarto of 1604):

    "Ah, half the hour is past! 'twill all be past anon
     O God,
     If thou wilt not have mercy on my soul,
     Yet for Christ's sake, whose blood hath ransom'd me,
     Impose some end to my incessant pain;" etc. ]

[Footnote 263: at last: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "at THE last."]

[Footnote 264: Enter Scholars: Here, of course, a change of scene is
supposed.  (This is not in the earlier play.)]

[Footnote 265: heaven: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "heauens."]

[Footnote 266: devils.... have: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631,
"DIUELL.... HATH."]

[Footnote 267: self: So 4to 1616.--2tos 1624, 1631, "same."]

The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Works of Christopher Marlowe, Vol. 3 (of 3)

This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Works of Christopher Marlowe, Vol. 3 (of 3)

Author: Christopher Marlowe

Editor: A. H. Bullen

Release date: April 30, 2007 [eBook #21262]
                Most recently updated: December 14, 2020

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Leonard Johnson and the Online
        Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
        file was produced from images generously made available
        by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WORKS OF CHRISTOPHER MARLOWE, VOL. 3 (OF 3) ***




Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Leonard Johnson and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries)










                         The English Dramatists

                           CHRISTOPHER MARLOWE

                            VOLUME THE THIRD




[Greek:
                                    Hadymelei
  thama men phormingi pamphnoisi t' en entesin auln.]

                           PINDAR, _Olymp._ vii.




                               THE WORKS

                                   OF

                           CHRISTOPHER MARLOWE



                               EDITED BY
                            A. H. BULLEN, B.A.


                            IN THREE VOLUMES
                            VOLUME THE THIRD



                                 LONDON
                              JOHN C. NIMMO
                   14. KING WILLIAM STREET, STRAND, W.C.
                               MDCCCLXXXV


_One hundred and twenty copies of this Edition on Laid paper, medium
8vo, have been printed, and are numbered consecutively as issued._

_No._ ____

CONTENTS OF VOL. III.


                                                                    PAGE

HERO AND LEANDER                                                       1

OVID'S ELEGIES                                                       103

EPIGRAMS BY J. D.                                                    211

THE FIRST BOOK OF LUCAN                                              249

THE PASSIONATE SHEPHERD TO HIS LOVE                                  281

FRAGMENT                                                             293

DIALOGUE IN VERSE                                                    295

APPENDICES                                                           301

INDEX TO THE NOTES                                                   355




                            HERO AND LEANDER.


Two editions of _Hero and Leander_ appeared in 1598. The first edition,
containing only Marlowe's portion of the poem, is entitled _Hero and
Leander. By Christopher Marloe. London, Printed by Adam Islip, for
Edward Blunt._ 1598. 4to. The title-page of the second edition, which
contains the complete poem, is _Hero and Leander: Begun by Christopher
Marloe; and finished by George Chapman. Ut Nectar, Ingenium. At London,
Printed by Felix Kingston, for Paule Linley, and are to be solde in
Paules Churche-yard, at the signe of the Blacke-beare._ 1598. 4to.

Two copies of the second edition were discovered a few years ago at
Lamport Hall (the seat of Sir Charles Isham, Bart.) by Mr. Charles
Edmonds. The existence of this edition was previously unknown. Later
editions are:--

_Hero and Leander: Begunne by Christopher Marloe: Whereunto is added the
first booke of Lucan translated line for line by the same Author. Ut
Nectar, Ingenium. At London Printed for John Flasket, and are to be
solde in Paules Church-yard, at the signe of the Blacke-beare. 1600.
4to._

_Hero and Leander: Begunne by Christopher Marloe, and finished by George
Chapman. Ut Nectar, Ingenium. At London. Imprinted for John Flasket, and
are to be sold in Paules Church-yard, at the signe of the blacke Beare.
1606. 4to._

_Hero and Leander: Begunne by Christopher Marloe, and finished by George
Chapman. Ut Nectar, Ingenium. At London. Imprinted for Ed. Blunt and W.
Barret, and are to be sold in Pauls Church-yard, at the signe of the
blacke Beare. 1609. 4to._

_Hero and Leander: Begunne by Christopher Marloe, and finished by George
Chapman. Ut Nectar, Ingenium. London. Printed by W. Stansby for Ed.
Blunt and W. Barret, and are to be sold in Pauls Church-yard, at the
signe of the Blacke Beare. 1613. 4to._

_Hero and Leander: Begun by Christoper Marloe, and finished by George
Chapman. Ut Nectar, Ingenium. London, Printed by A. M. for Richard
Hawkins: and are to bee sold at his Shop in Chancerie-Lane, neere
Serieants Inne. 1629. 4to._

_Hero and Leander: Begun by Christopher Marloe, and finished by George
Chapman. Ut Nectar, Ingenium. London: Printed by N. Okes for William
Leake, and are to be sold at his shop in Chancery-lane neere the Roules.
1637. 4to._

I have not had an opportunity of seeing the 4tos. of 1598 or the 4to. of
1600. For the text of the Isham copy, I am indebted to the _Works of
George Chapman: Poems and Minor Translations_, 1875. I have examined the
texts of eds. 1606, 1613, 1629, 1637; and my friend Mr. C. H. Firth has
examined for me the Bodleian copy of ed. 1600, in the margin of which
Malone has noted the readings of the first edition.




TO THE

RIGHT-WORSHIPFUL SIR THOMAS WALSINGHAM,

KNIGHT.


Sir, we think not ourselves discharged of the duty we owe to our friend
when we have brought the breathless body to the earth; for albeit the
eye there taketh his ever-farewell of that beloved object, yet the
impression of the man that hath been dear unto us, living an after-life
in our memory, there putteth us in mind of farther obsequies due unto
the deceased; and namely of the performance of whatsoever we may judge
shall make to his living credit and to the effecting of his
determinations prevented by the stroke of death. By these meditations
(as by an intellectual will) I suppose myself executor to the unhappily
deceased author of this poem; upon whom knowing that in his lifetime you
bestowed many kind favours, entertaining parts of reckoning and worth
which you found in him with good countenance and liberal affection, I
cannot but see so far into the will of him dead, that whatsoever issue
of his brain should chance to come abroad, that the first breath it
should take might be the gentle air of your liking; for, since his self
had been accustomed thereunto, it would prove more agreeable and
thriving to his right children than any other foster countenance
whatsoever. At this time seeing that this unfinished tragedy happens
under my hands to be imprinted; of a double duty, the one to yourself,
the other to the deceased, I present the same to your most favourable
allowance, offering my utmost self now and ever to be ready at your
worship's disposing:

                                                         EDWARD BLUNT.




HERO AND LEANDER.




THE FIRST SESTIAD.

_The Argument_[1] _of the First Sestiad._


        Hero's description and her love's;
        The fane of Venus, where he moves
        His worthy love-suit, and attains;
        Whose bliss the wrath of Fates restrains
        For Cupid's grace to Mercury:
        Which tale the author doth imply.

    On Hellespont, guilty of true love's blood,
    In view and opposite two cities stood,
    Sea-borderers,[2] disjoin'd by Neptune's might;
    The one Abydos, the other Sestos hight.
    At Sestos Hero dwelt; Hero the fair,
    Whom young Apollo courted for her hair,
    And offer'd as a dower his burning throne,
    Where she should sit, for men to gaze upon.
    The outside of her garments were of lawn,
    The lining purple silk, with gilt stars drawn;                    10
    Her wide sleeves green, and border'd with a grove,
    Where Venus in her naked glory strove
    To please the careless and disdainful eyes
    Of proud Adonis, that before her lies;
    Her kirtle blue, whereon was many a stain,
    Made with the blood of wretched lovers slain.
    Upon her head she ware[3] a myrtle wreath,
    From whence her veil reach'd to the ground beneath:
    Her veil was artificial flowers and leaves,
    Whose workmanship both man and beast deceives:                    20
    Many would praise the sweet smell as she past,
    When 'twas the odour which her breath forth cast;
    And there for honey bees have sought in vain,
    And, beat from thence, have lighted there again.
    About her neck hung chains of pebble-stone,
    Which, lighten'd by her neck, like diamonds shone.
    She ware no gloves; for neither sun nor wind
    Would burn or parch her hands, but, to her mind.
    Or warm or cool them, for they took delight
    To play upon those hands, they were so white.                     30
    Buskins of shells, all silver'd, usd she,
    And branch'd with blushing coral to the knee;
    Where sparrows perch'd of hollow pearl and gold,
    Such as the world would wonder to behold:
    Those with sweet water oft her handmaid fills,
    Which as she went, would cherup through the bills.
    Some say, for her the fairest Cupid pin'd,
    And, looking in her face, was strooken blind.
    But this is true; so like was one the other,
    As he imagin'd Hero was his mother;                               40
    And oftentimes into her bosom flew,
    About her naked neck his bare arms threw,
    And laid his childish head upon her breast,
    And, with still panting rock,[4] there took his rest.
    So lovely-fair was Hero, Venus' nun,
    As Nature wept, thinking she was undone,
    Because she took more from her than she left,
    And of such wondrous beauty her bereft:
    Therefore, in sign her treasure suffer'd wrack,
    Since Hero's time hath half the world been black.                 50
      Amorous Leander, beautiful and young
    (Whose tragedy divine Musus sung),
    Dwelt at Abydos; since him dwelt there none
    For whom succeeding times make[5] greater moan.
    His dangling tresses, that were never shorn,
    Had they been cut, and unto Colchos borne,
    Would have allur'd the venturous youth of Greece
    To hazard more than for the golden fleece.
    Fair Cynthia wished his arms might be her Sphere;
    Grief makes her pale, because she moves not there.                60
    His body was as straight as Circe's wand;
    Jove might have sipt out nectar from his hand.
    Even as delicious meat is to the tast,
    So was his neck in touching, and surpast
    The white of Pelops' shoulder: I could tell ye,
    How smooth his breast was, and how white his belly;
    And whose immortal fingers did imprint
    That heavenly path with many a curious dint
    That runs along his back; but my rude pen
    Can hardly blazon forth the loves of men,                         70
    Much less of powerful gods: let it suffice
    That my slack Muse sings of Leander's eyes;
    Those orient cheeks and lips, exceeding his
    That leapt into the water for a kiss
    Of his own shadow, and, despising many,
    Died ere he could enjoy the love of any.
    Had wild Hippolytus Leander seen,
    Enamour'd of his beauty had he been:
    His presence made the rudest peasant melt,
    That in the vast uplandish country dwelt;                         80
    The barbarous Thracian soldier, mov'd with nought,
    Was mov'd with him, and for his favour sought.
    Some swore he was a maid in man's attire,
    For in his looks were all that men desire,--
    A pleasant-smiling cheek, a speaking eye,
    A brow for love to banquet royally;
    And such as knew he was a man, would say,
    "Leander, thou art made for amorous play:
    Why art thou not in love, and loved of all?
    Though thou be fair, yet be not thine own thrall."                90
      The men of wealthy Sestos every year,
    For his sake whom their goddess held so dear,
    Rose-cheek'd[6] Adonis, kept a solemn feast:
    Thither resorted many a wandering guest
    To meet their loves: such as had none at all
    Came lovers home from this great festival;
    For every street, like to a firmament,
    Glister'd with breathing stars, who, where they went,
    Frighted the melancholy earth, which deem'd
    Eternal heaven to burn, for so it seem'd,                        100
    As if another Phaton had got
    The guidance of the sun's rich chariot.
    But, far above the loveliest, Hero shin'd,
    And stole away th' enchanted gazer's mind;
    For like sea-nymphs' inveigling harmony,
    So was her beauty to the standers by;
    Nor that night-wandering, pale, and watery[7] star
    (When yawning dragons draw her thirling[8] car
    From Latmus' mount up to the gloomy sky,
    Where, crown'd with blazing light and majesty,                   110
    She proudly sits) more over-rules the flood
    Than she the hearts of those that near her stood.
    Even as when gaudy nymphs pursue the chase,
    Wretched Ixion's shaggy-footed race,
    Incens'd with savage heat, gallop amain
    From steep pine-bearing mountains to the plain,
    So ran the people forth to gaze upon her,
    And all that view'd her were enamour'd on her:
    And as in fury of a dreadful fight,
    Their fellows being slain or put to flight,                      120
    Poor soldiers stand with fear of death dead-strooken,
    So at her presence all surpris'd and tooken,
    Await the sentence of her scornful eyes;
    He whom she favours lives; the other dies:
    There might you see one sigh; another rage;
    And some, their violent passions to assuage,
    Compile sharp satires; but, alas, too late!
    For faithful love will never turn to hate;
    And many, seeing great princes were denied,
    Pin'd as they went, and thinking on her died.                    130
    On this feast-day--O cursd day and hour!--
    Went Hero thorough Sestos, from her tower
    To Venus' temple, where unhappily,
    As after chanc'd, they did each other spy.
    So fair a church as this had Venus none:
    The walls were of discolour'd[9] jasper-stone,
    Wherein was Proteus carved; and over-head
    A lively vine of green sea-agate spread,
    Where by one hand light-headed Bacchus hung,
    And with the other wine from grapes out-wrung.                   140
    Of crystal shining fair the pavement was;
    The town of Sestos call'd it Venus' glass:
    There might you see the gods, in sundry shapes,
    Committing heady riots, incests, rapes;
    For know, that underneath this radiant flour[10]
    Was Dane's statue in a brazen tower:
    Jove slily stealing from his sister's bed,
    To dally with Idalian Ganymed,
    And for his love Europa bellowing loud,
    And tumbling with the Rainbow in a cloud;                        150
    Blood-quaffing Mars heaving the iron net
    Which limping Vulcan and his Cyclops set;
    Love kindling fire, to burn such towns as Troy;
    Silvanus weeping for the lovely boy
    That now is turned into a cypress-tree,
    Under whose shade the wood-gods love to be.
    And in the midst a silver altar stood:
    There Hero, sacrificing turtles' blood,
    Vailed[11] to the ground, veiling her eyelids close;
    And modestly they opened as she rose:                            160
    Thence flew Love's arrow with the golden head;
    And thus Leander was enamourd.
    Stone-still he stood, and evermore he gaz'd,
    Till with the fire, that from his countenance blaz'd,
    Relenting Hero's gentle heart was strook:
    Such force and virtue hath an amorous look.
      It lies not in our power to love or hate,
    For will in us is over-rul'd by fate.
    When two are stript long ere the course begin,
    We wish that one should lose, the other win;                     170
    And one especially do we affect
    Of two gold ingots, like in each respect:
    The reason no man knows, let it suffice,
    What we behold is censur'd by our eyes.
    Where both deliberate, the love is slight:
    Who ever lov'd, that lov'd not at first sight?[12]
      He kneel'd; but unto her devoutly prayed:
    Chaste Hero to herself thus softly said,
    "Were I the saint he worships, I would hear him;"
    And, as she spake those words, came somewhat near him.           180
    He started up; she blushed as one asham'd;
    Wherewith Leander much more was inflam'd.
    He touch'd her hand; in touching it she trembled:
    Love deeply grounded hardly is dissembled.
    These lovers parled by the touch of hands:
    True love is mute, and oft amazd stands.
    Thus while dumb signs their yielding hearts entangled,
    The air with sparks of living fire was spangled;
    And night,[13] deep-drenched in misty Acheron,
    Heav'd up her head, and half the world upon                      190
    Breath'd darkness forth (dark night is Cupid's day):
    And now begins Leander to display
    Love's holy fire, with words, with sighs, and tears;
    Which, like sweet music, enter'd Hero's ears;
    And yet at every word she turn'd aside
    And always cut him off, as he replied.
    At last, like to a bold sharp sophister,
    With cheerful hope thus he accosted her.
    "Fair creature,[14] let me speak without offence:
    I would my rude words had the influence                          200
    To lead thy thoughts as thy fair looks do mine!
    Then shouldst thou be his prisoner, who is thine.
    Be not unkind and fair; mis-shapen stuff
    Are of behaviour boisterous and rough.
    O, shun me not, but hear me ere you go!
    God knows, I cannot force love as you do:
    My words shall be as spotless as my youth,
    Full of simplicity and naked truth.
    This sacrifice, whose sweet perfume descending
    From Venus' altar, to your footsteps bending,                    210
    Doth testify that you exceed her far,
    To whom you offer, and whose nun you are.
    Why should you worship her? her you surpass
    As much as sparkling diamonds flaring glass.
    A diamond set in lead his worth retains;
    A heavenly nymph, belov'd of human swains,
    Receives no blemish, but ofttimes more grace;
    Which makes me hope, although I am but base,
    Base in respect of thee divine and pure,
    Dutiful service may thy love procure;                            220
    And I in duty will excel all other,
    As thou in beauty dost exceed Love's mother.
    Nor heaven nor thou were made to gaze upon:
    As heaven preserves all things, so save thou one.
    A stately-builded ship, well rigg'd and tall,
    The ocean maketh more majestical;
    Why vow'st thou, then, to live in Sestos here,
    Who on Love's seas more glorious wouldst appear?
    Like untun'd golden strings all women are,
    Which long time lie untouch'd, will harshly jar.                 230
    Vessels of brass, oft handled, brightly shine:
    What diffrence betwixt[15] the richest mine
    And basest mould, but use? for both, not us'd,
    Are of like worth. Then treasure is abus'd,
    When misers keep it: being put to loan,
    In time it will return us two for one.
    Rich robes themselves and others do adorn;
    Neither themselves nor others, if not worn.
    Who builds a palace, and rams up the gate,
    Shall see it ruinous and desolate:                               240
    Ah, simple Hero, learn thyself to cherish!
    Lone women, like to empty houses, perish.
    Less sins the poor rich man, that starves himself
    In heaping up a mass of drossy pelf,
    Than such as you: his golden earth remains,
    Which, after his decease some other gains;
    But this fair gem, sweet in the loss alone,
    When you fleet hence, can be bequeath'd to none;
    Or, if it could, down from th' enamell'd sky
    All heaven would come to claim this legacy,                      250
    And with intestine broils the world destroy,
    And quite confound Nature's sweet harmony.
    Well therefore by the gods decreed it is,
    We human creatures should enjoy that bliss.
    One is no number;[16] maids are nothing, then,
    Without the sweet society of men.
    Wilt thou live single still? one shalt thou be,
    Though never-singling Hymen couple thee.
    Wild savages, that drink of running springs
    Think water far excels all earthly things;                       260
    But they, that daily taste neat[17] wine, despise it:
    Virginity, albeit some highly prize it,
    Compar'd with marriage, had you tried them both,
    Differs as much as wine and water doth.
    Base bullion for the stamp's sake we allow:
    Even so for men's impression do we you;
    By which alone, our reverend fathers say,
    Women receive perfection every way.
    This idol, which you term virginity,
    Is neither essence subject to the eye,                           270
    No, nor to any one exterior sense,
    Nor hath it any place of residence,
    Nor is't of earth or mould celestial,
    Or capable of any form at all.
    Of that which hath no being, do not boast;
    Things that are not at all, are never lost.
    Men foolishly do call it virtuous:
    What virtue is it, that is born with us?
    Much less can honour be ascrib'd thereto:
    Honour is purchas'd by the deeds we do;                          280
    Believe me, Hero, honour is not won,
    Until some honourable deed be done.
    Seek you, for chastity, immortal fame,
    And know that some have wrong'd Diana's name?
    Whose name is it, if she be false or not,
    So she be fair, but some vile tongues will blot?
    But you are fair, ay me! so wondrous fair,
    So young, so gentle, and so debonair.
    As Greece will think, if thus you live alone,
    Some one or other keeps you as his own.                          290
    Then, Hero, hate me not, nor from me fly,
    To follow swiftly-blasting infamy.
    Perhaps thy sacred priesthood makes thee loath:
    Tell me to whom mad'st thou that heedless oath?"
    "To Venus," answer'd she; and, as she spake,
    Forth from those two tralucent cisterns brake
    A stream of liquid pearl, which down her face
    Made milk-white paths, whereon the gods might trace
    To Jove's high court. He thus replied: "The rites
    In which Love's beauteous empress most delights,                 300
    Are banquets, Doric music, midnight revel,
    Plays, masks, and all that stern age counteth evil.
    Thee as a holy idiot doth she scorn;
    For thou, in vowing chastity, hast sworn
    To rob her name and honour, and thereby
    Committ'st a sin far worse than perjury,
    Even sacrilege against her deity,
    Through regular and formal purity.
    To expiate which sin, kiss and shake hands:
    Such sacrifice as this Venus demands."                           310
    Thereat she smil'd, and did deny him so,
    As put[18] thereby, yet might he hope for mo;
    Which makes him quickly reinforce his speech,
    And her in humble manner thus beseech:
    "Though neither gods nor men may thee deserve,
    Yet for her sake, whom you have vow'd to serve,
    Abandon fruitless cold virginity,
    The gentle queen of Love's sole enemy.
    Then shall you most resemble Venus' nun,
    When Venus' sweet rites are performed and done.                  320
    Flint-breasted Pallas joys in single life;
    But Pallas and your mistress are at strife.
    Love, Hero, then, and be not tyrannous;
    But heal the heart that thou hast wounded thus;
    Nor stain thy youthful years with avarice:
    Fair fools delight to be accounted nice.
    The richest[19] corn dies, if it be not reapt;
    Beauty alone is lost, too warily kept."
    These arguments he us'd, and many more;
    Wherewith she yielded, that was won before.                      330
    Hero's looks yielded, but her words made war:
    Women are won when they begin to jar.
    Thus, having swallow'd Cupid's golden hook,
    The more she striv'd, the deeper was she strook:
    Yet, evilly feigning anger, strove she still,
    And would be thought to grant against her will.
    So having paus'd a while, at last she said,
    "Who taught thee rhetoric to deceive a maid?
    Ay me! such words as these should I abhor,
    And yet I like them for the orator."                             340
    With that, Leander stooped to have embrac'd her,
    But from his spreading arms away she cast her,
    And thus bespake him: "Gentle youth, forbear
    To touch the sacred garments which I wear.
    Upon a rock, and underneath a hill,
    Far from the town (where all is whist[20] and still,
    Save that the sea, playing on yellow sand,
    Sends forth a rattling murmur to the land,
    Whose sound allures the golden Morpheus
    In silence of the night to visit us),                            350
    My turret stands; and there, God knows, I play
    With Venus' swans and sparrows all the day.
    A[21] dwarfish beldam bears me company,
    That hops about the chamber where I lie,
    And spends the night, that might be better spent,
    In vain discourse and apish merriment:--
    Come thither." As she spake this, her tongue tripp'd,
    For unawares "Come thither" from her slipp'd;
    And suddenly her former colour chang'd,
    And here and there her eyes through anger rang'd;                360
    And, like a planet moving several ways
    At one self instant, she, poor soul, assays,
    Loving, not to love at all, and every part
    Strove to resist the motions of her heart:
    And hands so pure, so innocent, nay, such
    As might have made Heaven stoop to have a touch,
    Did she uphold to Venus, and again
    Vow'd spotless chastity; but all in vain;
    Cupid beats down her prayers with his wings;
    Her vows above[22] the empty air he flings:                      370
    All deep enrag'd, his sinewy bow he bent,
    And shot a shaft that burning from him went;
    Wherewith she strooken, look'd so dolefully,
    As made Love sigh to see his tyranny;
    And, as she wept, her tears to pearl he turn'd,
    And wound them on his arm, and for her mourn'd.
    Then towards the palace of the Destinies,
    Laden with languishment and grief, he flies,
    And to those stern nymphs humbly made request,
    Both might enjoy each other, and be blest.                       380
    But with a ghastly dreadful countenance,
    Threatening a thousand deaths at every glance,
    They answer'd Love, nor would vouchsafe so much
    As one poor word, their hate to him was such:
    Hearken awhile, and I will tell you why.
    Heaven's wingd herald, Jove-born Mercury,
    The self-same day that he asleep had laid
    Enchanted Argus, spied a country maid,
    Whose careless hair, instead of pearl t'adorn it,
    Glister'd with dew, as one that seemed to scorn it;              390
    Her breath as fragrant as the morning rose;
    Her mind pure, and her tongue untaught to glose:
    Yet proud she was (for lofty Pride that dwells
    In tower'd courts, is oft in shepherds' cells),
    And too-too well the fair vermillion knew
    And silver tincture of her cheeks that drew
    The love of every swain. On her this god
    Enamour'd was, and with his snaky rod
    Did charm her nimble feet, and made her stay,
    The while upon a hillock down he lay,                            400
    And sweetly on his pipe began to play,
    And with smooth speech her fancy to assay,
    Till in his twining arms he lock'd her fast,
    And then he woo'd with kisses; and at last,
    As shepherds do, her on the ground he laid,
    And, tumbling in the grass, he often stray'd
    Beyond the bounds of shame, in being bold
    To eye those parts which no eye should behold;
    And, like an insolent commanding lover,
    Boasting his parentage, would needs discover                     410
    The way to new Elysium. But she,
    Whose only dower was her chastity,
    Having striven in vain, was now about to cry,
    And crave the help of shepherds that were nigh.
    Herewith he stay'd his fury, and began
    To give her leave to rise: away she ran;
    After went Mercury, who used such cunning,
    As she, to hear his tale, let off her running
    (Maids are not won by brutish force and might,
    But speeches full of pleasures and delight);                     420
    And, knowing Hermes courted her, was glad
    That she such loveliness and beauty had
    As could provoke his liking; yet was mute,
    And neither would deny nor grant his suit.
    Still vow'd he love: she, wanting no excuse
    To feed him with delays, as women use,
    Or thirsting after immortality,
    (All women are ambitious naturally),
    Impos'd upon her lover such a task,
    As he ought not perform, nor yet she ask;                        430
    A draught of flowing nectar she requested,
    Wherewith the king of gods and men is feasted.
    He, ready to accomplish what she will'd,
    Stole some from Hebe (Hebe Jove's cup fill'd),
    And gave it to his simple rustic love:
    Which being known,--as what is hid from Jove?--
    He inly storm'd, and wax'd more furious
    Than for the fire filch'd by Prometheus;
    And thrusts him down from heaven. He, wandering here,
    In mournful terms, with sad and heavy cheer,                     440
    Complain'd to Cupid: Cupid, for his sake,
    To be reveng'd on Jove did undertake;
    And those on whom heaven, earth, and hell relies,
    I mean the adamantine Destinies,
    He wounds with love, and forc'd them equally
    To dote upon deceitful Mercury.
    They offer'd him the deadly fatal knife
    That shears the slender threads[23] of human life;
    At his fair-feather'd feet the engines laid,
    Which th' earth from ugly Chaos' den upweigh'd.                  450
    These he regarded not; but did entreat
    That Jove, usurper of his father's seat,
    Might presently be banish'd into hell,
    And agd Saturn in Olympus dwell.
    They granted what he crav'd; and once again
    Saturn and Ops began their golden reign:
    Murder, rape, war, and[24] lust, and treachery,
    Were with Jove clos'd in Stygian empery.
    But long this blessd time continu'd not:
    As soon as he his wishd purpose got,                            460
    He, reckless of his promise, did despise
    The love of th' everlasting Destinies.
    They, seeing it, both Love and him abhorr'd,
    And Jupiter unto his place restor'd:
    And, but that Learning, in despite of Fate,
    Will mount aloft, and enter heaven-gate,
    And to the seat of Jove itself advance,
    Hermes had slept in hell with Ignorance.
    Yet, as a punishment, they added this,
    That he and Poverty should always kiss;                          470
    And to this day is every scholar poor:
    Gross gold from them runs headlong to the boor.
    Likewise the angry Sisters, thus deluded,
    To venge themselves on Hermes, have concluded
    That Midas' brood shall sit in Honour's chair,
    To which the Muses' sons are only heir;
    And fruitful wits, that inaspiring[25] are,
    Shall, discontent, run into regions far;
    And few great lords in virtuous deeds shall joy
    But be surpris'd with every garish toy,                          480
    And still enrich the lofty servile clown,
    Who with encroaching guile keeps learning down.
    Then muse not Cupid's suit no better sped,
    Seeing in their loves the Fates were injurd.

FOOTNOTES:

[1] The Arguments are by Chapman, who also divided Marlowe's portion of
the form into the First and Second Sestiad.

[2] Eds. 1600, 1606, 1613, "Sea-borders."--Ed. 1598, according to
Malone, has "sea-borderers;" and so eds. 1629, 1637.

[3] Some editions give "wore."

[4] Some eds. have "rockt," which may be the right reading.

[5] So ed. 1637.--The earlier editions that I have seen read "may."

[6] Cf. _Venus and Adonis_ (l. 3)--

    "_Rose-cheek'd Adonis_ hied him to the chace."

[7] So _Hamlet_ i. 1--

    "The _moist star_,
    Upon whose influence Neptune's empire stands."

[8] "_Thrilling_--tremulously moving."--_Dyce._ Perhaps the meaning
rather is _penetrating_--drilling its way through--"the gloomy sky."

[9] Variegated (Lat. _discolor_).

[10] Dyce quotes a passage of Harington's _Orlando Furioso_ where
"flowre" (floor) rhymes with "towre."

[11] Ed. 1600 and later 4tos. "Tail'd." For the coupling of "Vailed"
with "veiling," cf. 2. _Tamb._ v. iii. 6. "pitch their pitchy tents."

[12] This line is quoted in _As you like it_, iii. 5:--

    "Dead shepherd, now I find thy saw of might,--
    _Who ever lov'd, that lov'd not at first sight._"

[13] "A periphrasis of Night." Marginal note in ed. 1598.

[14] Lines 199-204, 221-222, are quoted, not quite accurately, by
Matthew in _Every Man in his Humour_, iv. 1.

[15] Some eds. give "between."

[16] Cf. Shakespeare, _Sonnet_ cxxxvi.--

    "Among a number one is reckoned none."

[17] Some eds. read "sweet."

[18] Cf. Second Sestiad, l. 73--

    "She with a kind of granting _put_ him _by_ it."

[19] This line is quoted in _England's Parnassus_ with the reading
"ripest."

[20] Hushed.

[21] "To the 'beldam nurse' there occurs the following allusion in
Drayton's _Heroical Epistle from Queen Mary to Charles Brandon_:--

    'There is no beldam nurse to powt nor lower
    When wantoning we revell in my tower,
    Nor need I top my turret with a light,
    To guide thee to me as thou swim'st by night.'"--_Broughton._

[22] So the old eds.--Dyce reads "about."

[23] We are reminded of _Lycidas_:--

    "Comes the blind Fury with the abhorrd shears
    And slits the thin-spun life."

[24] Omitted in ed. 1600 and later 4tos.

[25] This word cannot be right. Query, "high-aspiring?"




THE SECOND SESTIAD.

_The Argument of the Second Sestiad._


        Hero of love takes deeper sense,
        And doth her love more recompense:
        Their first night's meeting, where sweet kisses
        Are th' only crowns of both their blisses
        He swims t' Abydos, and returns:
        Cold Neptune with his beauty burns;
        Whose suit he shuns, and doth aspire
        Hero's fair tower and his desire.

    By this, sad Hero, with love unacquainted,
    Viewing Leander's face, fell down and fainted.
    He kiss'd her, and breath'd life[26] into her lips;
    Wherewith, as one displeas'd, away she trips;
    Yet, as she went, full often look'd behind,
    And many poor excuses did she find
    To linger by the way, and once she stay'd,
    And would have turn'd again, but was afraid,
    In offering parley, to be counted light:
    So on she goes, and, in her idle flight,                          10
    Her painted fan of curled plumes let fall,
    Thinking to train Leander therewithal.
    He, being a novice, knew not what she meant,
    But stay'd, and after her a letter sent;
    Which joyful Hero answer'd in such sort,
    As he had hope to scale the beauteous fort
    Wherein the liberal Graces locked their wealth;
    And therefore to her tower he got by stealth.
    Wide open stood the door; he need not climb;
    And she herself, before the pointed time,                         20
    Had spread the board, with roses strew'd the room,
    And oft looked out, and mused he did not come.
    At last he came: O, who can tell the greeting
    These greedy lovers had at their first meeting?
    He asked; she gave; and nothing was denied;
    Both to each other quickly were affied:
    Look how their hands, so were their hearts united,
    And what he did, she willingly requited.
    (Sweet are the kisses, the embracements sweet,
    When like desires and like[27] affections meet;                   30
    For from the earth to heaven is Cupid raised,
    Where fancy is in equal balance paised.[28])
    Yet she this rashness suddenly repented,
    And turn'd aside, and to herself lamented,
    As if her name and honour had been wronged
    By being possessed of him for whom she longed;
    I, and she wished, albeit not from her heart,
    That he would leave her turret and depart.
    The mirthful god of amorous pleasure smiled
    To see how he this captive nymph beguiled;                        40
    For hitherto he did but fan the fire,
    And kept it down, that it might mount the higher.
    Now wax'd she jealous lest his love abated,
    Fearing her own thoughts made her to be hated.
    Therefore unto him hastily she goes,
    And, like light Salmacis, her body throws
    Upon his bosom, where with yielding eyes
    She offers up herself a sacrifice
    To slake her anger, if he were displeased:
    O, what god would not therewith be appeased?                      50
    Like sop's cock, this jewel he enjoyed,
    And as a brother with his sister toyed,
    Supposing nothing else was to be done,
    Now he her favour and goodwill had won.
    But know you not that creatures wanting sense,
    By nature have a mutual appetence,
    And, wanting organs to advance a step,
    Mov'd by love's force, unto each other lep?
    Much more in subjects having intellect
    Some hidden influence breeds like effect.                         60
    Albeit Leander, rude in love and raw,
    Long dallying with Hero, nothing saw
    That might delight him more, yet he suspected
    Some amorous rites or other were neglected.
    Therefore unto his body hers he clung:
    She, fearing on the rushes[29] to be flung,
    Strived with redoubled strength; the more she strived,
    The more a gentle pleasing heat revived,
    Which taught him all that elder lovers know;
    And now the same gan so to scorch and glow,                       70
    As in plain terms, yet cunningly, he'd crave[30] it:
    Love always makes those eloquent that have it.
    She, with a kind of granting, put him by it,
    And ever, as he thought himself most nigh it,
    Like to the tree of Tantalus, she fled,
    And, seeming lavish, saved her maidenhead.
    Ne'er king more sought to keep his diadem,
    Than Hero this inestimable gem:
    Above our life we love a steadfast friend;
    Yet when a token of great worth we send,                          80
    We often kiss it, often look thereon,
    And stay the messenger that would be gone;
    No marvel, then, though Hero would not yield
    So soon to part from that she dearly held:
    Jewels being lost are found again; this never;
    'Tis lost but once, and once lost, lost for ever.

    Now had the Morn espied her lover's steeds;
    Whereat she starts, puts on her purple weeds,
    And, red for anger that he stayed so long,
    All headlong throws herself the clouds among.                     90
    And now Leander, fearing to be missed,
    Embraced her suddenly, took leave, and kissed:
    Long was he taking leave, and loath to go,
    And kissed again, as lovers use to do.
    Sad Hero wrung him by the hand, and wept,
    Saying, "Let your vows and promises be kept:"
    Then standing at the door, she turned about,
    As loath to see Leander going out.
    And now the sun, that through th' horizon peeps,
    As pitying these lovers, downward creeps;                        100
    So that in silence of the cloudy night,
    Though it was morning, did he take his flight.
    But what the secret trusty night concealed,
    Leander's amorous habit soon revealed:
    With Cupid's myrtle was his bonnet crowned,
    About his arms the purple riband wound,
    Wherewith she wreath'd her largely-spreading hair;
    Nor could the youth abstain, but he must wear
    The sacred ring wherewith she was endowed,
    When first religious chastity she vowed;                         110
    Which made his love through Sestos to be known,
    And thence unto Abydos sooner blown
    Than he could sail; for incorporeal Fame,
    Whose weight consists in nothing but her name,
    Is swifter than the wind, whose tardy plumes
    Are reeking water and dull earthly fumes.

    Home when he came, he seemed not to be there,
    But, like exild air thrust from his sphere,
    Set in a foreign place; and straight from thence,
    Alcides-like, by mighty violence,                                120
    He would have chas'd away the swelling main,
    That him from her unjustly did detain.
    Like as the sun in a diameter
    Fires and inflames objects removd far,
    And heateth kindly, shining laterally;
    So beauty sweetly quickens when 'tis nigh,
    But being separated and removed,
    Burns where it cherished, murders where it loved.
    Therefore even as an index to a book,
    So to his mind was young Leander's look.                         130
    O, none but gods have power[31] their love to hide!
    Affection by the countenance is descried;
    The light of hidden fire itself discovers,
    And love that is concealed betrays poor lovers.
    His secret flame apparently was seen:
    Leander's father knew where he had been,
    And for the same mildly rebuk'd his son,
    Thinking to quench the sparkles new-begun.
    But love, resisted once, grows passionate,
    And nothing more than counsel lovers hate;                       140
    For as a hot proud horse highly disdains
    To have his head controlled, but breaks the reins,
    Spits forth the ringled[32] bit, and with his hoves
    Checks the submissive ground; so he that loves,
    The more he is restrain'd, the worse he fares:
    What is it now but mad Leander dares?
    "O Hero, Hero!" thus he cried full oft;
    And then he got him to a rock aloft,
    Where having spied her tower, long star'd he on't,
    And pray'd the narrow toiling Hellespont                         150
    To part in twain, that he might come and go;
    But still the rising billows answer'd, "No."
    With that, he stripp'd him to the ivory skin,
    And, crying, "Love, I come," leap'd lively in:
    Whereat the sapphire-visaged god grew proud,
    And made his capering Triton sound aloud,
    Imagining that Ganymede, displeas'd,
    Had left the heavens; therefore on him he seiz'd.
    Leander strived; the waves about him wound,
    And pull'd him to the bottom, where the ground                   160
    Was strewed with pearl, and in low coral groves
    Sweet-singing mermaids sported with their loves
    On heaps of heavy gold, and took great pleasure
    To spurn in careless sort the shipwreck treasure;
    For here the stately azure palace stood,
    Where kingly Neptune and his train abode.
    The lusty god embrac'd him, called him "Love,"
    And swore he never should return to Jove:
    But when he knew it was not Ganymed,
    For under water he was almost dead,                              170
    He heav'd him up, and, looking on his face,
    Beat down the bold waves with his triple mace,
    Which mounted up, intending to have kiss'd him,
    And fell in drops like tears because they miss'd him.
    Leander, being up, began to swim,
    And, looking back, saw Neptune follow him:
    Whereat aghast, the poor soul gan to cry,
    "O, let me visit Hero ere I die!"
    The god put Helle's bracelet on his arm,
    And swore the sea should never do him harm.                      180
    He clapped his plump cheeks, with his tresses played,
    And, smiling wantonly, his love bewrayed;
    He watched his arms, and, as they open'd wide
    At every stroke, betwixt them would he slide,
    And steal a kiss, and then run out and dance,
    And, as he turn'd, cast many a lustful glance,
    And throw him gaudy toys to please his eye,
    And dive into the water, and there pry
    Upon his breast, his thighs, and every limb,
    And up again, and close beside him swim,                         190
    And talk of love. Leander made reply,
    "You are deceiv'd; I am no woman, I."
    Thereat smil'd Neptune, and then told a tale,
    How that a shepherd, sitting in a vale,
    Play'd with a boy so lovely-fair[33] and kind,
    As for his love both earth and heaven pin'd;
    That of the cooling river durst not drink,
    Lest water-nymphs should pull him from the brink;
    And when he sported in the fragrant lawns,
    Goat-footed Satyrs and up-staring[34] Fauns                      200
    Would steal him thence. Ere half this tale was done,
    "Ay me," Leander cried, "th' enamoured sun,
    That now should shine on Thetis' glassy bower,
    Descends upon my radiant Hero's tower:
    O, that these tardy arms of mine were wings!"
    And, as he spake, upon the waves he springs.
    Neptune was angry that he gave no ear,
    And in his heart revenging malice bare:
    He flung at him his mace; but, as it went,
    He call'd it in, for love made him repent:                       210
    The mace, returning back, his own hand hit,
    As meaning to be venged for darting it.
    When this fresh-bleeding wound Leander viewed,
    His colour went and came, as if he rued
    The grief which Neptune felt: in gentle breasts
    Relenting thoughts, remorse, and pity rests;
    And who have hard hearts and obdurate minds,
    But vicious, hare-brained, and illiterate hinds?
    The god, seeing him with pity to be moved,
    Thereon concluded that he was beloved.                           220
    (Love is too full of faith, too credulous,
    With folly and false hope deluding us);
    Wherefore, Leander's fancy to surprise,
    To the rich ocean for gifts he flies:
    Tis wisdom to give much; a gift prevails
    When deep persuading oratory fails,
      By this, Leander, being near the land,
    Cast down his weary feet, and felt the sand.
    Breathless albeit he were, he rested not
    Till to the solitary tower he got;                               230
    And knocked and called: at which celestial noise
    The longing heart of Hero much more joys,
    Than nymphs and shepherds when the timbrel rings,
    Or crookd dolphin when the sailor sings.
    She stayed not for her robes, but straight arose,
    And, drunk with gladness, to the door she goes;
    Where seeing a naked man, she screeched for fear
    (Such sights as this to tender maids are rare),
    And ran into the dark herself to hide
    (Rich jewels in the dark are soonest spied).                     240
    Unto her was he led, or rather drawn,
    By those white limbs which sparkled through the lawn.
    The nearer that he came, the more she fled,
    And, seeking refuge, slipt into her bed;
    Whereon Leander sitting, thus began,
    Through numbing cold, all feeble, faint, and wan.
    "If not for love, yet, love, for pity-sake,
    Me in thy bed and maiden bosom take;
    At least vouchsafe these arms some little room,
    Who, hoping to embrace thee, cheerly swoom:                      250
    This head was beat with many a churlish billow,
    And therefore let it rest upon thy pillow."
    Herewith affrighted, Hero shrunk away,
    And in her lukewarm place Leander lay;
    Whose lively heat, like fire from heaven fet,[35]
    Would animate gross clay, and higher set
    The drooping thoughts of base-declining souls,
    Than dreary-Mars-carousing nectar bowls.
    His hands he cast upon her like a snare:
    She, overcome with shame and sallow[36] fear,                    260
    Like chaste Diana when Acton spied her,
    Being suddenly betray'd, div'd down to hide her;
    And, as her silver body downward went,
    With both her hands she made the bed a tent,
    And in her own mind thought herself secure,
    O'ercast with dim and darksome coverture.
    And now she lets him whisper in her ear,
    Flatter, entreat, promise, protest, and swear:
    Yet ever, as he greedily assay'd
    To touch those dainties, she the harpy play'd,                   270
    And every limb did, as a soldier stout,
    Defend the fort, and keep the foeman out;
    For though the rising ivory mount he scal'd,
    Which is with azure circling lines empal'd,
    Much like a globe (a globe may I term this,
    By which Love sails to regions full of bliss),
    Yet there with Sisyphus he toil'd in vain,
    Till gentle parley did the truce obtain
    Even[37] as a bird, which in our hands we wring,
    Forth plungeth, and oft flutters with her wing,                  280
    She trembling strove: this strife of hers, like that
    Which made the world, another world begat
    Of unknown joy. Treason was in her thought,
    And cunningly to yield herself she sought.
    Seeming not won, yet won she was at length:
    In such wars women use but half their strength.
    Leander now, like Theban Hercules,
    Enter'd the orchard of th' Hesperides;
    Whose fruit none rightly can describe, but he
    That pulls or shakes it from the golden tree.                    290
    Wherein Leander, on her quivering breast,
    Breathless spoke something, and sigh'd out the rest;
    Which so prevail'd, as he with small ado,
    Enclos'd her in his arms, and kiss'd her too:
    And every kiss to her was as a charm,
    And to Leander as a fresh alarm:
    So that the truce was broke, and she, alas,
    Poor silly maiden, at his mercy was.
    Love is not full of pity, as men say,
    But deaf and cruel where he means to prey.                       300
      And now she wish'd this night were never done,
    And sigh'd to think upon th' approaching sun;
    For much it griev'd her that the bright day-light
    Should know the pleasure of this blessd night,
    And them, like Mars and Erycine, display[38]
    Both in each other's arms chain'd as they lay.
    Again, she knew not how to frame her look,
    Or speak to him, who in a moment took
    That which so long, so charily she kept;
    And fain by stealth away she would have crept,                   310
    And to some corner secretly have gone,
    Leaving Leander in the bed alone.
    But as her naked feet were whipping out,
    He on the sudden cling'd her so about,
    That, mermaid-like, unto the floor she slid;
    One half appear'd, the other half was hid.
    Thus near the bed she blushing stood upright,
    And from her countenance behold ye might
    A kind of twilight break, which through the air,[39]
    As from an orient cloud, glimps'd[40] here and there;            320
    And round about the chamber this false morn
    Brought forth the day before the day was born.
    So Hero's ruddy cheek Hero betray'd,
    And her all naked to his sight display'd:
    Whence his admiring eyes more pleasure took
    Than Dis,[41] on heaps of gold fixing his look.
    By this, Apollo's golden harp began
    To sound forth music to the ocean;
    Which watchful Hesperus no sooner heard,
    But he the bright Day-bearing car[42] prepar'd,                  330
    And ran before, as harbinger of light,
    And with his flaring beams mock'd ugly Night,
    Till she, o'ercome with anguish, shame, and rage,
    Dang'd[43] down to hell her loathsome carriage.

FOOTNOTES:

[26] Cf. _Rom. and Jul._ v. 1--

    "I dreamed my lady came and found me dead,
    Strange dream that gives a dead man leave to think!--
    And _breathed such life with kisses in my lips_,
    That I revived and was an emperor."

[27] Omitted in eds. 1600, 1606, 1613, and 1637.

[28] Peised, weighed.

[29] Rooms were strewed with rushes before the introduction of carpets.
Shakespeare, like Marlowe, attributed the customs of his own day to
ancient times. Cf. _Cymb._ ii. 2--

                "Our Tarquin thus
    Did softly press the _rushes_ ere he wakened
    The chastity he wounded."

[30] Old eds. "crau'd."

[31] Some eds. give "O, none have power but gods."

[32] "In ages and countries where mechanical ingenuity has but few
outlets it exhausts itself in the constructions of bits, each more
peculiar in form or more torturing in effect than that which has
preceded it. I have seen collections of these instruments of torments,
and among them some of which Marlowe's curious adjective would have been
highly descriptive. It may be, however, that the word is 'ring-led,' in
which shape it would mean guided by the ring on each side like a
snaffle."--_Cunningham._

[33] Some eds. give "so faire and kind." Cf. _Othello_, iv. 2--

                                  "O thou wind
    Who art so _lovely-fair_ and smell'st so sweet."

[34] Ed. 1613 and later eds. "upstarting."

[35] Fetched

[36] Some eds. give "shallow."

[37] In the old eds. this line and the next stood after l. 300. The
transposition was made by Singer in the edition of 1821.

[38] Old eds.--"then ... displaid," and in the next line "laid."

[39] Old eds. "heare" and "haire."

[40] Old eds. "glympse."

[41] Pluto was frequently identified by the Greeks with Plutus.

[42] Old eds. "day bright-bearing car."

[43] Dinged, dashed. Some eds. give "hurled."--Here Marlowe's share
ends.




THE EPISTLE[44] DEDICATORY

TO MY

BEST ESTEEMED AND WORTHILY HONOURED LADY THE

LADY WALSINGHAM,

ONE OF THE LADIES OF HER MAJESTY'S BED-CHAMBER.


I present your ladyship with the last affections of the first two Lovers
that ever Muse shrined in the Temple of Memory; being drawn by strange
instigation to employ some of my serious time in so trifling a subject,
which yet made the first Author, divine Musaeus, eternal. And were it
not that we must subject our accounts of these common received conceits
to servile custom, it goes much against my hand to sign that for a
trifling subject on which more worthiness of soul hath been shewed, and
weight of divine wit, than can vouchsafe residence in the leaden gravity
of any money-monger; in whose profession all serious subjects are
concluded. But he that shuns trifles must shun the world; out of whose
reverend heaps of substance and austerity I can and will ere long single
or tumble out as brainless and passionate fooleries as ever panted in
the bosom of the most ridiculous lover. Accept it, therefore, good
Madam, though as a trifle, yet as a serious argument of my affection;
for to be thought thankful for all free and honourable favours is a
great sum of that riches my whole thrift intendeth.

Such uncourtly and silly dispositions as mine, whose contentment hath
other objects than profit or glory, are as glad, simply for the naked
merit of virtue, to honour such as advance her, as others that are hard
to commend with deepliest politique bounty.

It hath therefore adjoined much contentment to my desire of your true
honour to hear men of desert in court add to mine own knowledge of your
noble disposition how gladly you do your best to prefer their desires,
and have as absolute respect to their mere good parts as if they came
perfumed and charmed with golden incitements. And this most sweet
inclination, that flows from the truth and eternity of Nobles[se],
assure your Ladyship doth more suit your other ornaments, and makes more
to the advancement of your name and happiness of your proceedings, than
if like others you displayed ensigns of state and sourness in your
forehead, made smooth with nothing but sensuality and presents.

This poor Dedication (in figure of the other unity betwixt Sir Thomas
and yourself) hath rejoined you with him, my honoured best friend; whose
continuance of ancient kindness to my still-obscured estate, though it
cannot increase my love to him which hath been entirely circular; yet
shall it encourage my deserts to their utmost requital, and make my
hearty gratitude speak; to which the unhappiness of my life hath
hitherto been uncomfortable and painful dumbness.

By your Ladyship's vowed in

            most wished service,

                     GEORGE CHAPMAN.

FOOTNOTES:

[44] This Epistle is only found in the Isham copy, 1598.




THE THIRD SESTIAD.

_The Argument of the Third Sestiad._


        Leander to the envious light
        Resigns his night-sports with the night,
        And swims the Hellespont again.
        Thesme, the deity sovereign
        Of customs and religious rites,
        Appears, reproving[45] his delights,
        Since nuptial honours he neglected;
        Which straight he vows shall be effected.
        Fair Hero, left devirginate,
        Weighs, and with fury wails her state;                        10
        But with her love and woman's wit
        She argues and approveth it.

    New light gives new directions, fortunes new,
    To fashion our endeavours that ensue.
    More harsh, at least more hard, more grave and high
    Our subject runs, and our stern Muse must fly.
    Love's edge is taken off, and that light flame,
    Those thoughts, joys, longings, that before became
    High unexperienc'd blood, and maids' sharp plights,
    Must now grow staid, and censure the delights,
    That, being enjoy'd, ask judgment; now we praise,
    As having parted: evenings crown the days.                        10
      And now, ye wanton Loves, and young Desires,
    Pied Vanity, the mint of strange attires,
    Ye lisping Flatteries, and obsequious Glances,
    Relentful Musics, and attractive Dances,
    And you detested Charms constraining love!
    Shun love's stoln sports by that these lovers prove.
      By this, the sovereign of heaven's golden fires,
    And young Leander, lord of his desires,
    Together from their lovers' arms arose:
    Leander into Hellespontus throws                                  20
    His Hero-handled body, whose delight
    Made him disdain each other epithite.
    And as amidst th' enamour'd waves he swims,
    The god of gold[46] of purpose gilt his limbs,
    That, this word _gilt_[47] including double sense,
    The double guilt of his incontinence
    Might be express'd, that had no stay t' employ
    The treasure which the love-god let him joy
    In his dear Hero, with such sacred thrift
    As had beseem'd so sanctified a gift;                             30
    But, like a greedy vulgar prodigal,
    Would on the stock dispend, and rudely fall,
    Before his time, to that unblessd blessing
    Which, for lust's plague, doth perish with possessing:
    Joy graven in sense, like snow[48] in water, wasts:
    Without preserve of virtue, nothing lasts.
    What man is he, that with a wealthy eye
    Enjoys a beauty richer than the sky,
    Through whose white skin, softer than soundest sleep,
    With damask eyes the ruby blood doth peep,                        40
    And runs in branches through her azure veins,
    Whose mixture and first fire his love attains;
    Whose both hands limit both love's deities,
    And sweeten human thoughts like Paradise;
    Whose disposition silken is and kind,
    Directed with an earth-exempted mind;--
    Who thinks not heaven with such a love is given?
    And who, like earth, would spend that dower of heaven,
    With rank desire to joy it all at first?
    What simply kills our hunger, quencheth thirst,                   50
    Clothes but our nakedness, and makes us live,
    Praise doth not any of her favours give:
    But what doth plentifully minister
    Beauteous apparel and delicious cheer,
    So order'd that it still excites desire,
    And still gives pleasure freeness to aspire,
    The palm of Bounty ever moist preserving;
    To Love's sweet life this is the courtly carving.
    Thus Time and all-states-ordering Ceremony
    Had banish'd all offence: Time's golden thigh                     60
    Upholds the flowery body of the earth
    In sacred harmony, and every birth
    Of men and actions[49] makes legitimate;
    Being us'd aright, the use of time is fate.
      Yet did the gentle flood transfer once more
    This prize of love home to his father's shore;
    Where he unlades himself on that false wealth
    That makes few rich,--treasures compos'd by stealth;
    And to his sister, kind Hermione
    (Who on the shore kneel'd, praying to the sea                     70
    For his return), he all love's goods did show,
    In Hero seis'd for him, in him for Hero.
      His most kind sister all his secrets knew,
    And to her, singing, like a shower, he flew,
    Sprinkling the earth, that to their tombs took in
    Streams dead for love, to leave his ivory shin,
    Which yet a snowy foam did leave above,
    As soul to the dead water that did love;
    And from hence did the first white roses spring
    (For love is sweet and fair in everything),                       80
    And all the sweeten'd shore, as he did go,
    Was crown'd with odorous roses, white as snow.
    Love-blest Leander was with love so fill'd,
    That love to all that touch'd him he instill'd;
    And as the colours of all things we see,
    To our sight's powers communicated be,
    So to all objects that in compass came
    Of any sense he had, his senses' flame
    Flow'd from his parts with force so virtual,
    It fir'd with sense things mere[50] insensual.                    90
      Now, with warm baths and odours comforted,
    When he lay down, he kindly kiss'd his bed,
    As consecrating it to Hero's right,
    And vow'd thereafter, that whatever sight
    Put him in mind of Hero or her bliss,
    Should be her altar to prefer a kiss.
      Then laid he forth his late-enrichd arms,
    In whose white circle Love writ all his charms,
    And made his characters sweet Hero's limbs,
    When on his breast's warm sea she sideling swims;                100
    And as those arms, held up in circle, met,
    He said, "See, sister, Hero's carquenet!
    Which she had rather wear about her neck,
    Than all the jewels that do Juno deck."
      But, as he shook with passionate desire
    To put in flame his other secret fire,
    A music so divine did pierce his ear,
    As never yet his ravish'd sense did hear;
    When suddenly a light of twenty hues
    Brake through the roof, and, like the rainbow, views,            110
    Amaz'd Leander: in whose beams came down
    The goddess Ceremony, with a crown
    Of all the stars; and Heaven with her descended:
    Her flaming hair to her bright feet extended,
    By which hung all the bench of deities;
    And in a chain, compact of ears and eyes,
    She led Religion: all her body was
    Clear and transparent as the purest glass,
    For she was all[51] presented to the sense:
    Devotion, Order, State, and Reverence,                           120
    Her shadows were; Society, Memory;
    All which her sight made live, her absence die.
    A rich disparent pentacle[52] she wears,
    Drawn full of circles and strange characters.
    Her face was changeable to every eye;
    One way look'd ill, another graciously;
    Which while men view'd, they cheerful were and holy,
    But looking off, vicious and melancholy.
    The snaky paths to each observd law
    Did Policy in her broad bosom draw.                              130
    One hand a mathematic crystal sways,
    Which, gathering in one line a thousand rays
    From her bright eyes, Confusion burns to death,
    And all estates of men distinguisheth:
    By it Morality and Comeliness
    Themselves in all their sightly figures dress.
    Her other hand a laurel rod applies,
    To beat back Barbarism and Avarice,
    That follow'd, eating earth and excrement
    And human limbs; and would make proud ascent                     140
    To seats of gods, were Ceremony slain.
    The Hours and Graces bore her glorious train;
    And all the sweets of our society
    Were spher'd and treasur'd in her bounteous eye.
    Thus she appear'd, and sharply did reprove
    Leander's bluntness in his violent love;
    Told him how poor was substance without rites,
    Like bills unsign'd; desires without delights;
    Like meats unseason'd; like rank corn that grows
    On cottages, that none or reaps or sows;                         150
    Not being with civil forms confirm'd and bounded,
    For human dignities and comforts founded;
    But loose and secret all their glories hide;
    Fear fills the chamber, Darkness decks the bride.
      She vanish'd, leaving pierc'd Leander's heart
    With sense of his unceremonious part,
    In which, with plain neglect of nuptial rites,
    He close and flatly fell to his delights:
    And instantly he vow'd to celebrate
    All rites pertaining to his married state.                       160
    So up he gets, and to his father goes,
    To whose glad ears he doth his vows disclose.
    The nuptials are resolv'd with utmost power;
    And he at night would swim to Hero's tower,
    From whence he meant to Sestos' forkd bay
    To bring her covertly, where ships must stay,
    Sent by his[53] father, throughly rigg'd and mann'd,
    To waft her safely to Abydos' strand.
    There leave we him; and with fresh wing pursue
    Astonish'd Hero, whose most wishd view                          170
    I thus long have foreborne, because I left her
    So out of countenance, and her spirits bereft her:
    To look on one abash'd is impudence,
    When of slight faults he hath too deep a sense.
    Her blushing het[54] her chamber; she look'd out,
    And all the air she purpled round about;
    And after it a foul black day befell,
    Which ever since a red morn doth foretell,
    And still renews our woes for Hero's woe;
    And foul it prov'd because it figur'd so                         180
    The next night's horror; which prepare to hear;
    I fail, if it profane your daintiest ear.
      Then, ho,[55] most strangely-intellectual fire,
    That, proper to my soul, hast power t' inspire
    Her burning faculties, and with the wings
    Of thy unspherd flame visit'st the springs
    Of spirits immortal! Now (as swift as Time
    Doth follow Motion) find th' eternal clime
    Of his free soul, whose living subject[56] stood
    Up to the chin in the Pierian flood,                             190
    And drunk to me half this Musan story,
    Inscribing it to deathless memory:
    Confer with it, and make my pledge as deep,
    That neither's draught be consecrate to sleep;
    Tell it how much his late desires I tender
    (If yet it know not), and to light surrender
    My soul's dark offspring, willing it should die
    To loves, to passions, and society.
      Sweet Hero, left upon her bed alone,
    Her maidenhead, her vows, Leander gone,                          200
    And nothing with her but a violent crew
    Of new-come thoughts, that yet she never knew,
    Even to herself a stranger, was much like
    Th' Iberian city[57] that War's hand did strike
    By English force in princely Essex' guide,
    When Peace assur'd her towers had fortified,
    And golden-finger'd India had bestow'd
    Such wealth on her, that strength and empire flow'd
    Into her turrets, and her virgin waist
    The wealthy girdle of the sea embraced;                          210
    Till our Leander, that made Mars his Cupid,
    For soft love-suits, with iron thunders chid;
    Swum to her towers,[58] dissolv'd her virgin zone;
    Led in his power, and made Confusion
    Run through her streets amaz'd, that she suppos'd
    She had not been in her own walls enclos'd,
    But rapt by wonder to some foreign state,
    Seeing all her issue so disconsolate,
    And all her peaceful mansions possess'd
    With war's just spoil, and many a foreign guest                  220
    From every corner driving an enjoyer,
    Supplying it with power of a destroyer.
    So far'd fair Hero in th' expugnd fort
    Of her chaste bosom; and of every sort
    Strange thoughts possess'd her, ransacking her breast
    For that that was not there, her wonted rest.
    She was a mother straight, and bore with pain
    Thoughts that spake straight, and wish'd their mother slain;
    She hates their lives, and they their own and hers:
    Such strife still grows where sin the race prefers:              230
    Love is a golden bubble, full of dreams,
    That waking breaks, and fills us with extremes.
    She mus'd how she could look upon her sire,
    And not shew that without, that was intire;[59]
    For as a glass is an inanimate eye,
    And outward forms embraceth inwardly,
    So is the eye an animate glass, that shows
    In-forms without us; and as Phoebus throws
    His beams abroad, though he in clouds be clos'd,
    Still glancing by them till he find oppos'd                      240
    A loose and rorid vapour that is fit
    T' event[60] his searching beams, and useth it
    To form a tender twenty-colour'd eye,
    Cast in a circle round about the sky;
    So when our fiery soul, our body's star,
    (That ever is in motion circular,)
    Conceives a form, in seeking to display it
    Through all our cloudy parts, it doth convey it
    Forth at the eye, as the most pregnant place,
    And that reflects it round about the face.                       250
    And this event, uncourtly Hero thought,
    Her inward guilt would in her looks have wrought;
    For yet the world's stale cunning she resisted,
    To bear foul thoughts, yet forge what looks she listed,
    And held it for a very silly sleight,
    To make a perfect metal counterfeit,
    Glad to disclaim herself, proud of an art
    That makes the face a pandar to the heart.
    Those be the painted moons, whose lights profane
    Beauty's true Heaven, at full still in their wane;               260
    Those be the lapwing-faces that still cry,
    "Here 'tis!" when that they vow is nothing nigh:
    Base fools! when every moorish fool[61] can teach
    That which men think the height of human reach.
    But custom, that the apoplexy is
    Of bed-rid nature and lives led amiss,
    And takes away all feeling of offence,
    Yet braz'd not Hero's brow with impudence;
    And this she thought most hard to bring to pass,
    To seem in countenance other than she was,                       270
    As if she had two souls, one for the face,
    One for the heart, and that they shifted place
    As either list to utter or conceal
    What they conceiv'd, or as one soul did deal
    With both affairs at once, keeps and ejects
    Both at an instant contrary effects;
    Retention and ejection in her powers
    Being acts alike; for this one vice of ours,
    That forms the thought, and sways the countenance,
    Rules both our motion and our utterance.                         280
      These and more grave conceits toil'd Hero's spirits;
    For, though the light of her discoursive wits
    Perhaps might find some little hole to pass
    Through all these worldly cinctures, yet, alas!
    There was a heavenly flame encompass'd her,--
    Her goddess, in whose fane she did prefer
    Her virgin vows, from whose impulsive sight
    She knew the black shield of the darkest night
    Could not defend her, nor wit's subtlest art:
    This was the point pierc'd Hero to the heart;                    290
    Who, heavy to the death, with a deep sigh,
    And hand that languished, took a robe was nigh,
    Exceeding large, and of black cypres[62] made,
    In which she sate, hid from the day in shade,
    Even over head and face, down to her feet;
    Her left hand made it at her bosom meet,
    Her right hand lean'd on her heart-bowing knee,
    Wrapp'd in unshapeful folds, 'twas death to see;
    Her knee stay'd that, and that her falling face;
    Each limb help'd other to put on disgrace:                       300
    No form was seen, where form held all her sight;
    But like an embryon that saw never light,
    Or like a scorchd statue made a coal
    With three-wing'd lightning, or a wretched soul
    Muffled with endless darkness, she did sit:
    The night had never such a heavy spirit.
    Yet might a penetrating[63] eye well see
    How fast her clear tears melted on her knee
    Through her black veil, and turn'd as black as it,
    Mourning to be her tears. Then wrought her wit                   310
    With her broke vow, her goddess' wrath, her fame,--
    All tools that enginous[64] despair could frame:
    Which made her strew the floor with her torn hair,
    And spread her mantle piece-meal in the air.
    Like Jove's son's club, strong passion struck her down,
    And with a piteous shriek enforc'd her swoun:
    Her shriek made with another shriek ascend
    The frighted matron that on her did tend;
    And as with her own cry her sense was slain,
    So with the other it was called again.                           320
    She rose, and to her bed made forcd way,
    And laid her down even where Leander lay;
    And all this while the red sea of her blood
    Ebb'd with Leander: but now turn'd the flood,
    And all her fleet of spirits came swelling in,
    With child[65] of sail, and did hot fight begin
    With those severe conceits she too much marked:
    And here Leander's beauties were embarked.
    He came in swimming, painted all with joys,
    Such as might sweeten hell: his thought destroys                 330
    All her destroying thoughts; she thought she felt
    His heart in hers, with her contentions melt,
    And chide her soul that it could so much err,
    To check the true joys he deserved in her.
    Her fresh-heat blood cast figures in her eyes,
    And she suppos'd she saw in Neptune's skies
    How her star wander'd, wash'd in smarting brine,
    For her love's sake, that with immortal wine
    Should be embath'd, and swim in more heart's-ease
    Than there was water in the Sestian seas.                        340
    Then said her Cupid-prompted spirit, "Shall I
    Sing moans to such delightsome harmony?
    Shall slick-tongu'd Fame, patch'd up with voices rude,
    The drunken bastard of the multitude
    (Begot when father Judgment is away,
    And, gossip-like, says because others say,
    Takes news as if it were too hot to eat,
    And spits it slavering forth for dog-fees meat),
    Make me, for forging a fantastic vow,
    Presume to bear what makes grave matrons bow?                    350
    Good vows are never broken with good deeds,
    For then good deeds were bad: vows are but seeds,
    And good deeds fruits; even those good deeds that grow
    From other stocks than from th' observd vow.
    That is a good deed that prevents a bad:
    Had I not yielded, slain myself I had.
    Hero Leander is, Leander Hero;
    Such virtue love hath to make one of two.
    If, then, Leander did my maidenhead git,
    Leander being myself, I still retain it:                         360
    We break chaste vows when we live loosely ever,
    But bound as we are, we live loosely never:
    Two constant lovers being join'd in one,
    Yielding to one another, yield to none.
    We know not how to vow till love unblind us,
    And vows made ignorantly never bind us.
    Too true it is, that, when 'tis gone, men hate
    The joy[66] as vain they took in love's estate:
    But that's since they have lost the heavenly light
    Should show them way to judge of all things right.               370
    When life is gone, death must implant his terror:
    As death is foe to life, so love to error.
    Before we love, how range we through this sphere,
    Searching the sundry fancies hunted here:
    Now with desire of wealth transported quite
    Beyond our free humanity's delight;
    Now with ambition climbing falling towers,
    Whose hope to scale, our fear to fall devours;
    Now rapt with pastimes, pomp, all joys impure:
    In things without us no delight is sure.                         380
    But love, with all joys crowned, within doth sit:
    O goddess, pity love, and pardon it!"
    Thus spake she[67] weeping: but her goddess' ear
    Burn'd with too stern a heat, and would not hear.
    Ay me! hath heaven's strait fingers no more graces
    For such as Hero[68] than for homeliest faces?
    Yet she hoped well, and in her sweet conceit
    Weighing her arguments, she thought them weight,
    And that the logic of Leander's beauty,
    And them together, would bring proofs of duty;                   390
    And if her soul, that was a skilful glance
    Of heaven's great essence, found such imperance[69]
    In her love's beauties, she had confidence
    Jove loved him too, and pardoned her offence:
    Beauty in heaven and earth this grace doth win,
    It supples rigour, and it lessens sin.
    Thus, her sharp wit, her love, her secrecy,
    Trooping together, made her wonder why
    She should not leave her bed, and to the temple;
    Her health said she must live; her sex, dissemble.               400
    She viewed Leander's place, and wished he were
    Turned to his place, so his place were Leander.
    "Ay me," said she, "that love's sweet life and sense
    Should do it harm! my love had not gone hence
    Had he been like his place: O blessd place,
    Image of constancy! Thus my love's grace
    Parts nowhere, but it leaves something behind
    Worth observation: he renowns his kind:
    His motion is, like heaven's, orbicular,
    For where he once is, he is ever there.                          410
    This place was mine; Leander, now 'tis thine;
    Thou being myself, then it is double mine,
    Mine, and Leander's mine, Leander's mine.
    O, see what wealth it yields me, nay, yields him!
    For I am in it, he for me doth swim.
    Rich, fruitful love, that, doubling self estates,
    Elixir-like contracts, though separates!
    Dear place, I kiss thee, and do welcome thee,
    As from Leander ever sent to me."

FOOTNOTES:

[45] Old eds. "improving."

[46] "He calls Phoebus the god of gold, since the virtue of his beams
creates it."--Marginal note in the Isham copy.

[47] The reader will remember how grimly Lady Macbeth plays upon this
word:--

    "I'll _gild_ the faces of the grooms withal:
    For it must seem their _guilt_."--ii. 2.

[48] "It is not likely that Burns had ever read _Hero and Leander_, but
compare _Tam o' Shanter_--

    'But pleasures are like poppies spread,
    You seize the flower, its bloom is shed,
    Or like the snow falls in the river,
    A moment white--then melts for ever!'"

--_Cunningham._

[49] In _England's Parnassus_ the reading is "of men audacious."

[50] Wholly.

[51] Some eds. give "For as she was."

[52] A magical figure formed of intersected triangles. It was supposed
to preserve the wearer from the assaults of demons. "Disparent would
seem to mean that the five points of the ornaments radiated distinctly
one from the other."--_Cunningham._

[53] Old eds. "her."

[54] Heated.

[55] Old eds. "how."

[56] Substance, as opposed to spirit. Cf. note. Vol. i., 203.

[57] Cadiz, which was taken in June 21, 1596, by the force under the
joint command of Essex and Howard of Effingham.

[58] So the Isham copy.--The other old eds. read "townes," for which
Dyce gives "town."

[59] Within.

[60] Vent forth.

[61] "Fowl" and "fool" had the same pronunciation. Cf. _3 Henry VI._ v.
6:--

    "Why, what a peevish _fool_ was he of Crete,
    That taught his son the office of a _fowl_!
    And yet for all his wings the _fool_ was drowned."

The "moorish fool" is explained by the allusion to the lapwing, two
lines above. (The lapwing was supposed to draw the searcher from her
nest by crying in other places. "The lapwing cries most furthest from
her nest."--_Ray's Proverbs._)

[62] A kind of crape.

[63] So the modern editors for an "imitating."

[64] Ingenious. Chapman has the form "enginous" in his translation of
the Odyssey, i. 452,

    "By open force or prospects _enginous_."

[65] Some modern editors unnecessarily give "With _crowd_ of sail."

[66] Old eds. "joys."

[67] Old eds. "he."

[68] Some eds. give "For such a Hero."

[69] Command.




THE FOURTH SESTIAD.

_The Argument of the Fourth Sestiad._


        Hero, in sacred habit deckt,
        Doth private sacrifice effect.
        Her scarf's description, wrought by Fate;
        Ostents that threaten her estate;
        The strange, yet physical, events,
        Leander's counterfeit[70] presents.
        In thunder Cyprides descends,
        Presaging both the lovers' ends:
        Ecte, the goddess of remorse,
        With vocal and articulate force                               10
        Inspires Leucote, Venus' swan,
        T' excuse the Beauteous Sestian.
        Venus, to wreak her rites' abuses,
        Creates the monster Eronusis,
        Inflaming Hero's sacrifice
        With lightning darted from her eyes;
        And thereof springs the painted beast
        That ever since taints every breast.

    Now from Leander's place she rose, and found
    Her hair and rent robe scatter'd on the ground;
    Which taking up, she every piece did lay
    Upon an altar, where in youth of day
    She us'd t' exhibit private sacrifice:
    Those would she offer to the deities
    Of her fair goddess and her powerful son,
    As relics of her late-felt passion;
    And in that holy sort she vow'd to end them,
    In hope her violent fancies, that did rend them,                  10
    Would as quite fade in her love's holy fire,
    As they should in the flames she meant t' inspire.
    Then put she on all her religious weeds,
    That decked her in her secret sacred deeds;
    A crown of icicles, that sun nor fire
    Could ever melt, and figur'd chaste desire;
    A golden star shined in her naked breast,
    In honour of the queen-light of the east.
    In her right hand she held a silver wand,
    On whose bright top Peristera did stand.                          20
    Who was a nymph, but now transformed a dove,
    And in her life was dear in Venus' love;
    And for her sake she ever since that time
    Choosed doves to draw her coach through heaven's blue clime.
    Her plenteous hair in curld billows swims
    On her bright shoulder: her harmonious limbs
    Sustained no more but a most subtile veil,
    That hung on them, as it durst not assail
    Their different concord; for the weakest air
    Could raise it swelling from her beauties fair;                   30
    Nor did it cover, but adumbrate only
    Her most heart-piercing parts, that a blest eye
    Might see, as it did shadow, fearfully,
    All that all-love-deserving paradise:
    It was as blue as the most freezing skies;
    Near the sea's hue, for thence her goddess came:
    On it a scarf she wore of wondrous frame;
    In midst whereof she wrought a virgin's face,
    From whose each cheek a fiery blush did chase
    Two crimson flames, that did two ways extend,                     40
    Spreading the ample scarf to either end;
    Which figur'd the division of her mind,
    Whiles yet she rested bashfully inclin'd,
    And stood not resolute to wed Leander;
    This serv'd her white neck for a purple sphere,
    And cast itself at full breadth down her back:
    There, since the first breath that begun the wrack
    Of her free quiet from Leander's lips,
    She wrought a sea, in one flame, full of ships;
    But that one ship where all her wealth did pass,                  50
    Like simple merchants' goods, Leander was;
    For in that sea she naked figured him;
    Her diving needle taught him how to swim,
    And to each thread did such resemblance give,
    For joy to be so like him it did live:
    Things senseless live by art, and rational die
    By rude contempt of art and industry.
    Scarce could she work, but, in her strength of thought,
    She fear'd she prick'd Leander as she wrought,[71]
    And oft would shriek so, that her guardian, frighted,             60
    Would startling haste, as with some mischief cited:
    They double life that dead things' griefs sustain;
    They kill that feel not their friends' living pain.
    Sometimes she fear'd he sought her infamy;
    And then, as she was working of his eye,
    She thought to prick it out to quench her ill;
    But, as she prick'd, it grew more perfect still:
    Trifling attempts no serious acts advance;
    The fire of love is blown by dalliance.
    In working his fair neck she did so grace it,                     70
    She still was working her own arms t' embrace it:
    That, and his shoulders, and his hands were seen
    Above the stream; and with a pure sea-green
    She did so quaintly shadow every limb,
    All might be seen beneath the waves to swim.
      In this conceited scarf she wrought beside
    A moon in change, and shooting stars did glide
    In number after her with bloody beams;
    Which figur'd her affects[72] in their extremes,
    Pursuing nature in her Cynthian body,                             80
    And did her thoughts running on change imply;
    For maids take more delight, when they prepare,
    And think of wives' states, than when wives they are.
    Beneath all these she wrought a fisherman,[73]
    Drawing his nets from forth the ocean;
    Who drew so hard, ye might discover well
    The toughen'd sinews in his neck did swell:
    His inward strains drave out his blood-shot eyes,
    And springs of sweat did in his forehead rise;
    Yet was of naught but of a serpent sped,                          90
    That in his bosom flew and stung him dead:
    And this by Fate into her mind was sent,
    Not wrought by mere instinct of her intent.
    At the scarf's other end her hand did frame,
    Near the fork'd point of the divided flame,
    A country virgin keeping of a vine,
    Who did of hollow bulrushes combine
    Snares for the stubble-loving grasshopper,
    And by her lay her scrip that nourish'd her.
    Within a myrtle shade she sate and sung;                         100
    And tufts of waving reeds above her sprung,
    Where lurked two foxes, that, while she applied
    Her trifling snares, their thieveries did divide,
    One to the vine, another to her scrip,
    That she did negligently overslip;
    By which her fruitful vine and wholesome fare
    She suffered spoiled to make a childish snare.
    These ominous fancies did her soul express,
    And every finger made a prophetess,
    To show what death was hid in love's disguise,                   110
    And make her judgment conquer Destinies.
    O, what sweet forms fair ladies' souls do shroud,
    Were they made seen and forcd through their blood;
    If through their beauties, like rich work through lawn,
    They would set forth their minds with virtues drawn,
    In letting graces from their fingers fly,
    To still their eyas[74] thoughts with industry;
    That their plied wits in numbered silks might sing
    Passion's huge conquest, and their needles[75] leading
    Affection prisoner through their own-built cities,               120
    Pinioned with stones and Arachnean ditties.
      Proceed we now with Hero's sacrifice:
    She odours burned, and from their smoke did rise
    Unsavoury fumes, that air with plagues inspired;
    And then the consecrated sticks she fired.
    On whose pale flames an angry spirit flew,
    And beat it down still as it upward grew;
    The virgin tapers that on th' altar stood,
    When she inflam'd them, burned as red as blood;[76]
    All sad ostents of that too near success,[77]                    130
    That made such moving beauties motionless.
    Then Hero wept; but her affrighted eyes
    She quickly wrested from the sacrifice,
    Shut them, and inwards for Leander looked,
    Search'd her soft bosom, and from thence she plucked
    His lovely picture; which when she had viewed,
    Her beauties were with all love's joys renewed;
    The odours sweeten'd, and the fires burned clear,
    Leander's form left no ill object there:
    Such was his beauty, that the force of light,                    140
    Whose knowledge teacheth wonders infinite,
    The strength of number and proportion,
    Nature had placed in it to make it known,
    Art was her daughter, and what human wits
    For study lost, entombed in drossy spirits.
    After this accident (which for her glory
    Hero could not but make a history),
    Th' inhabitants of Sestos and Abydos
    Did every year, with feasts propitious,
    To fair Leander's picture sacrifice:                             150
    And they were persons of especial price
    That were allowed it, as an ornament
    T' enrich their houses, for the continent
    Of the strange virtues all approved it held;
    For even the very look of it repelled
    All blastings, witchcrafts, and the strifes of nature
    In those diseases that no herbs could cure;
    The wolfy sting of avarice it would pull,
    And make the rankest miser bountiful;
    It kill'd the fear of thunder and of death;                      160
    The discords that conceit engendereth
    'Twixt man and wife, it for the time would cease;
    The flames of love it quench'd, and would increase;
    Held in a prince's hand, it would put out
    The dreadful'st comet; it would ease[78] all doubt
    Of threaten'd mischiefs; it would bring asleep
    Such as were mad; it would enforce to weep
    Most barbarous eyes; and many more effects
    This picture wrought, and sprung[79] Leandrian[80] sects;
    Of which was Hero first; for he whose form,                      170
    Held in her hand, clear'd such a fatal storm,
    From hell she thought his person would defend her,
    Which night and Hellespont would quickly send her.
    With this confirm'd, she vow'd to banish quite
    All thought of any check to her delight;
    And, in contempt of silly bashfulness,
    She would the faith of her desires profess,
    Where her religion should be policy,
    To follow love with zeal her piety;
    Her chamber her cathedral-church should be,                      180
    And her Leander her chief deity;
    For in her love these did the gods forego;
    And though her knowledge did not teach her so,
    Yet did it teach her this, that what her heart
    Did greatest hold in her self-greatest part,
    That she did make her god; and 'twas less naught
    To leave gods in profession and in thought,
    Than in her love and life; for therein lies
    Most of her duties and their dignities;
    And, rail the brain-bald world at what it will,                  190
    That's the grand atheism that reigns in it still.
    Yet singularity she would use no more,
    For she was singular too much before;
    But she would please the world with fair pretext:
    Love would not leave her conscience perplext:
    Great men that will have less do for them, still
    Must bear them out, though th' acts be ne'er so ill;
    Meanness must pander be to Excellence;
    Pleasure atones Falsehood and Conscience:
    Dissembling was the worst, thought Hero then,                    200
    And that was best, now she must live with men.
    O virtuous love, that taught her to do best
    When she did worst, and when she thought it least!
    Thus would she still proceed in works divine,
    And in her sacred state of priesthood shine,
    Handling the holy rites with hands as bold,
    As if therein she did Jove's thunder hold,
    And need not fear those menaces of error,
    Which she at others threw with greatest terror.
    O lovely Hero, nothing is thy sin,                               210
    Weigh'd with those foul faults other priests are in!
    That having neither faiths, nor works, nor beauties,
    T' engender any 'scuse for slubbered[81] duties,
    With as much countenance fill their holy chairs,
    And sweat denouncements 'gainst profane affairs,
    As if their lives were cut out by their places,
    And they the only fathers of the graces.
      Now, as with settled mind she did repair
    Her thoughts to sacrifice her ravished hair
    And her torn robe, which on the altar lay,                       220
    And only for religion's fire did stay,
    She heard a thunder by the Cyclops beaten,
    In such a volley as the world did threaten,
    Given Venus as she parted th' airy sphere,
    Descending now to chide with Hero here:
    When suddenly the goddess' waggoners,
    The swans and turtles that, in coupled pheres,[82]
    Through all worlds' bosoms draw her influence,
    Lighted in Hero's window, and from thence
    To her fair shoulders flew the gentle doves,--                   230
    Graceful _done_[83] that sweet pleasure loves,
    And ruff-foot Chreste[84] with the tufted crown;
    Both which did kiss her, though their goddess frown.
    The swans did in the solid flood, her glass,
    Proin[85] their fair plumes; of which the fairest was
    Jove-lov'd Leucote,[86] that pure brightness is;
    The other bounty-loving Dapsilis.[87]
    All were in heaven, now they with Hero were:
    But Venus' looks brought wrath, and urgd fear.
    Her robe was scarlet; black her head's attire:                   240
    And through her naked breast shin'd streams of fire,
    As when the rarifid air is driven
    In flashing streams, and opes the darken'd heaven.
    In her white hand a wreath of yew she bore;
    And, breaking th' icy wreath sweet Hero wore,
    She forc'd about her brows her wreath of yew,
    And said, "Now, minion, to thy fate be true,
    Though not to me; endure what this portends:
    Begin where lightness will, in shame it ends.
    Love makes thee cunning; thou art current now,                   250
    By being counterfeit: thy broken vow
    Deceit with her pied garters must rejoin,
    And with her stamp thou countenances must coin;
    Coyness, and pure[88] deceits, for purities,
    And still a maid wilt seem in cozen'd eyes,
    And have an antic face to laugh within,
    While thy smooth looks make men digest thy sin.
    But since thy lips (least thought forsworn) forswore,
    Be never virgin's vow worth trusting more!"
      When Beauty's dearest did her goddess hear                     260
    Breathe such rebukes 'gainst that she could not clear,
    Dumb sorrow spake aloud in tears and blood,
    That from her grief-burst veins, in piteous flood,
    From the sweet conduits of her favour fell.
    The gentle turtles did with moans make swell
    Their shining gorges; the while black-ey'd swans
    Did sing as woful epicedians,
    As they would straightways die: when Pity's queen,
    The goddess Ecte,[89] that had ever been
    Hid in a watery cloud near Hero's cries,                         270
    Since the first instant of her broken eyes,
    Gave bright Leucote voice, and made her speak,
    To ease her anguish, whose swoln breast did break
    With anger at her goddess, that did touch
    Hero so near for that she us'd so much;
    And, thrusting her white neck at Venus, said:
    "Why may not amorous Hero seem a maid,
    Though she be none, as well as you suppress
    In modest cheeks your inward wantonness?
    How often have we drawn you from above,                          280
    T' exchange with mortals rites for rites in love!
    Why in your priest, then, call you that offence,
    That shines in you, and is[90] your influence?"
    With this, the Furies stopp'd Leucote's lips,
    Enjoin'd by Venus; who with rosy whips
    Beat the kind bird. Fierce lightning from her eyes
    Did set on fire fair Hero's sacrifice,
    Which was her torn robe and enforcd hair;
    And the bright flame became a maid most fair
    For her aspct: her tresses were of wire,                        290
    Knit like a net, where hearts set all on fire,
    Struggled in pants, and could not get releast;
    Her arms were all with golden pincers drest,
    And twenty-fashioned knots, pulleys, and brakes,
    And all her body girt with painted snakes;
    Her down-parts in a scorpion's tail combined,
    Freckled with twenty colours; pied wings shined
    Out of her shoulders; cloth had never dye,
    Nor sweeter colours never viewd eye,
    In scorching Turkey, Cares, Tartary,                             300
    Than shined about this spirit notorious;
    Nor was Arachne's web so glorious.
    Of lightning and of shreds she was begot;
    More hold in base dissemblers is there not.
    Her name was Eronusis.[91] Venus flew
    From Hero's sight, and at her chariot drew
    This wondrous creature to so steep a height,
    That all the world she might command with sleight
    Of her gay wings; and then she bade her haste,--
    Since Hero had dissembled, and disgraced                         310
    Her rites so much,--and every breast infect
    With her deceits: she made her architect
    Of all dissimulation; and since then
    Never was any trust in maids or men.
                                        O, it spited
    Fair Venus' heart to see her most delighted,
    And one she choos'd, for temper of her mind
    To be the only ruler of her kind,
    So soon to let her virgin race be ended!
    Not simply for the fault a whit offended,                        320
    But that in strife for chasteness with the Moon,
    Spiteful Diana bade her show but one
    That was her servant vow'd, and liv'd a maid;
    And, now she thought to answer that upbraid,
    Hero had lost her answer: who knows not
    Venus would seem as far from any spot
    Of light demeanour, as the very skin
    'Twixt Cynthia's brows? sin is asham'd of sin.
    Up Venus flew, and scarce durst up for fear
    Of Phoebe's laughter, when she pass'd her sphere:                330
    And so most ugly-clouded was the light,
    That day was hid in day; night came ere night;
    And Venus could not through the thick air pierce,
    Till the day's king, god of undaunted verse,
    Because she was so plentiful a theme
    To such as wore his laurel anademe.
    Like to a fiery bullet made descent,
    And from her passage those fat vapours rent,
    That being not throughly rarified to rain,
    Melted like pitch, as blue as any vein;                          340
    And scalding tempests made the earth to shrink
    Under their fervour, and the world did think
    In every drop a torturing spirit flew,
    It pierc'd so deeply, and it burn'd so blue.
      Betwixt all this and Hero, Hero held
    Leander's picture, as a Persian shield;
    And she was free from fear of worst success:
    The more ill threats us, we suspect the less:
    As we grow hapless, violence subtle grows,
    Dumb, deaf, and blind, and comes when no man knows.              350

FOOTNOTES:

[70] Picture.

[71] "This conceit was suggested to Chapman by a passage in Skelton's
_Phyllyp Sparowe_:

    "But whan I was sowing his beke,
    Methought, my sparow did speke,
    And opened his prety byll,
    Saynge, Mayd, ye are in wyll
    Agayne me for to kyll,
    Ye prycke me in the head.'

--_Works_, I, 57, ed. Dyce."--_Dyce._

[72] Affections.

[73] "This description of the fisherman, as well as the picture which
follows it, are borrowed (with alterations) from the first _Idyl_ of
Theocritus."--_Dyce._

[74] "Eyas" is the name for an unfledged hawk. "Eyas thoughts" would
mean "thoughts not yet full-grown,--immature." Dyce thinks the meaning
of "eyas" here may be "restless." (Old eds. "yas.")

[75] A monosyllable.

[76] Some eds. give "them, then they burned as blood."

[77] Approaching catastrophe.

[78] Some eds. "and."

[79] Used transitively.

[80] Some eds. "Leanders."

[81] Shakespeare uses the verb "slubber" in the sense of "perform in a
slovenly manner" (_Merchant of Venice_, ii. 8, "Slubber not business for
my sake").

[82] Companions, yoke-mates.

[83] Gr. [Greek: hdon].

[84] From Lat. _crista_?

[85] Prune.

[86] Gr. [Greek: leukots].

[87] Gr. [Greek: dapsils].

[88] Some eds. read "Coyne and impure."

[89] From Gr. [Greek: oiktos]?

[90] Some eds. "in."

[91] "A compound, probably, from [Greek: ers] and [Greek: nosos] or
[Greek: nousos] _Ionice_." Ed. 1821.




THE FIFTH SESTIAD.

_The Argument of the Fifth Sestiad._


        Day doubles his accustom'd date,
        As loath the Night, incens'd by Fate,
        Should wreck our lovers. Hero's plight;
        Longs for Leander and the night:
        Which ere her thirsty wish recovers,
        She sends for two betrothd lovers,
        And marries them, that, with their crew,
        Their sports, and ceremonies due,
        She covertly might celebrate,
        With secret joy her own estate.                               10
        She makes a feast, at which appears
        The wild nymph Teras, that still bears
        An ivory lute, tells ominous tales,
        And sings at solemn festivals.

    Now was bright Hero weary of the day,
    Thought an Olympiad in Leander's stay.
    Sol and the soft-foot Hours hung on his arms,
    And would not let him swim, foreseeing his harms:
    That day Aurora double grace obtain'd
    Of her love Phoebus; she his horses reign'd,
    Set[92] on his golden knee, and, as she list,
    She pull'd him back; and as she pull'd she kiss'd,
    To have him turn to bed: he lov'd her more,
    To see the love Leander Hero bore:                                10
    Examples profit much; ten times in one,
    In persons full of note, good deeds are done.
      Day was so long, men walking fell asleep;
    The heavy humours that their eyes did steep
    Made them fear mischiefs. The hard streets were beds
    For covetous churls and for ambitious heads,
    That, spite of Nature, would their business ply:
    All thought they had the falling epilepsy,
    Men grovell'd so upon the smother'd ground;
    And pity did the heart of Heaven confound.                        20
    The Gods, the Graces, and the Muses came
    Down to the Destinies, to stay the frame
    Of the true lovers' deaths, and all world's tears:
    But Death before had stopp'd their cruel ears.
    All the celestials parted mourning then,
    Pierc'd with our human miseries more than men:
    Ah, nothing doth the world with mischief fill,
    But want of feeling one another's ill!
      With their descent the day grew something fair,
    And cast a brighter robe upon the air.                            30
    Hero, to shorten time with merriment,
    For young Alcmane[93] and bright Mya sent,
    Two lovers that had long crav'd marriage-dues
    At Hero's hands: but she did still refuse;
    For lovely Mya was her consort vow'd
    In her maid state, and therefore not allow'd
    To amorous nuptials: yet fair Hero now
    Intended to dispense with her cold vow,
    Since hers was broken, and to marry her:
    The rites would pleasing matter minister                          40
    To her conceits, and shorten tedious day.
    They came; sweet Music usher'd th' odorous way,
    And wanton Air in twenty sweet forms danced
    After her fingers; Beauty and Love advanced
    Their ensigns in the downless rosy faces
    Of youths and maids led after by the Graces.
    For all these Hero made a friendly feast,
    Welcom'd them kindly, did much love protest,
    Winning their hearts with all the means she might.
    That, when her fault should chance t' abide the light             50
    Their loves might cover or extenuate it,
    And high in her worst fate make pity sit.
      She married them; and in the banquet came,
    Borne by the virgins. Hero striv'd to frame
    Her thoughts to mirth: ay me! but hard it is
    To imitate a false and forcd bliss;
    Ill may a sad mind forge a merry face,
    Nor hath constraind laughter any grace.
    Then laid she wine on cares to make them sink:
    Who fears the threats of Fortune, let him drink.[94]              60
      To these quick nuptials enter'd suddenly
    Admird Teras with the ebon thigh;
    A nymph that haunted the green Sestian groves,
    And would consort soft virgins in their loves,
    At gaysome triumphs and on solemn days,
    Singing prophetic elegies and lays,
    And fingering of a silver lute she tied
    With black and purple scarfs by her left side.
    Apollo gave it, and her skill withal,
    And she was term'd his dwarf, she was so small:                   70
    Yet great in virtue, for his beams enclosed
    His virtues in her; never was proposed
    Riddle to her, or augury, strange or new,
    But she resolv'd it; never slight tale flew
    From her charm'd lips without important sense,
    Shown in some grave succeeding consequence.
      This little sylvan, with her songs and tales,
    Gave such estate to feasts and nuptials,
    That though ofttimes she forewent tragedies,
    Yet for her strangeness still she pleas'd their eyes;             80
    And for her smallness they admir'd her so,
    They thought her perfect born, and could not grow.
      All eyes were on her. Hero did command
    An altar decked with sacred state should stand
    At the feast's upper end, close by the bride,
    On which the pretty nymph might sit espied.
    Then all were silent; every one so hears,
    As all their senses climb'd into their ears:
    And first this amorous tale, that fitted well
    Fair Hero and the nuptials, she did tell.                         90


_The Tale of Teras._

    Hymen, that now is god of nuptial rites,
    And crowns with honour Love and his delights,
    Of Athens was a youth, so sweet of face,
    That many thought him of the female race;
    Such quickening brightness did his clear eyes dart,
    Warm went their beams to his beholder's heart,
    In such pure leagues his beauties were combin'd,
    That there your nuptial contracts first were signed;
    For as proportion, white and crimson, meet
    In beauty's mixture, all right clear and sweet,                  100
    The eye responsible, the golden hair,
    And none is held, without the other, fair;
    All spring together, all together fade;
    Such intermix'd affections should invade
    Two perfect lovers; which being yet unseen,
    Their virtues and their comforts copied been
    In beauty's concord, subject to the eye;
    And that, in Hymen, pleased so matchlessly,
    That lovers were esteemed in their full grace,
    Like form and colour mixed in Hymen's face;                      110
    And such sweet concord was thought worthy then
    Of torches, music, feasts, and greatest men:
    So Hymen look'd that even the chastest mind
    He mov'd to join in joys of sacred kind;
    For only now his chin's first down consorted
    His head's rich fleece in golden curls contorted;
    And as he was so loved, he loved so too:
    So should best beauties bound by nuptials, do.
      Bright Eucharis, who was by all men said
    The noblest, fairest, and the richest maid                       120
    Of all th' Athenian damsels, Hymen lov'd
    With such transmission, that his heart remov'd
    From his white breast to hers: but her estate,
    In passing his, was so interminate
    For wealth and honour, that his love durst feed
    On naught but sight and hearing, nor could breed
    Hope of requital, the grand prize of love;
    Nor could he hear or see, but he must prove
    How his rare beauty's music would agree
    With maids in consort; therefore robbd he                       130
    His chin of those same few first fruits it bore,
    And, clad in such attire as virgins wore,
    He kept them company, and might right well,
    For he did all but Eucharis excel
    In all the fair of beauty! yet he wanted
    Virtue to make his own desires implanted
    In his dear Eucharis; for women never
    Love beauty in their sex, but envy ever.
    His judgment yet, that durst not suit address,
    Nor, past due means, presume of due success,                     140
    Reason gat Fortune in the end to speed
    To his best prayers[95]: but strange it seemed, indeed,
    That Fortune should a chaste affection bless:
    Preferment seldom graceth bashfulness.
    Nor grac'd it Hymen yet; but many a dart,
    And many an amorous thought, enthralled[96] his heart,
    Ere he obtained her; and he sick became,
    Forced to abstain her sight; and then the flame
    Raged in his bosom. O, what grief did fill him!
    Sight made him sick, and want of sight did kill him.             150
    The virgins wonder'd where Ditia stay'd,
    For so did Hymen term himself, a maid.
    At length with sickly looks he greeted them:
    Tis strange to see 'gainst what an extreme stream
    A lover strives; poor Hymen look'd so ill,
    That as in merit he increasd still
    By suffering much, so he in grace decreas'd:
    Women are most won, when men merit least:
    If Merit look not well, Love bids stand by;
    Love's special lesson is to please the eye.                      160
    And Hymen soon recovering all he lost,
    Deceiving still these maids, but himself most,
    His love and he with many virgin dames,
    Noble by birth, noble by beauty's flames,
    Leaving the town with songs and hallow'd lights
    To do great Ceres Eleusina rites
    Of zealous sacrifice, were made a prey
    To barbarous rovers, that in ambush lay,
    And with rude hands enforc'd their shining spoil,
    Far from the darkened city, tired with toil:                     170
    And when the yellow issue of the sky
    Came trooping forth, jealous of cruelty
    To their bright fellows of this under-heaven,
    Into a double night they saw them driven,--
    A horrid cave, the thieves' black mansion;
    Where, weary of the journey they had gone,
    Their last night's watch, and drunk with their sweet gains,
    Dull Morpheus enter'd, laden with silken chains,
    Stronger than iron, and bound the swelling veins
    And tird senses of these lawless swains.                        180
    But when the virgin lights thus dimly burn'd,
    O, what a hell was heaven in! how they mourn'd
    And wrung their hands, and wound their gentle forms
    Into the shapes of sorrow! golden storms
    Fell from their eyes; as when the sun appears,
    And yet it rains, so show'd their eyes their tears:
    And, as when funeral dames watch a dead corse,
    Weeping about it, telling with remorse
    What pains he felt, how long in pain he lay,
    How little food he ate, what he would say;                       190
    And then mix mournful tales of other's deaths,
    Smothering themselves in clouds of their own breaths;
    At length, one cheering other, call for wine;
    The golden bowl drinks tears out of their eyne,
    As they drink wine from it; and round it goes,
    Each helping other to relieve their woes;
    So cast these virgins' beauties mutual rays,
    One lights another, face the face displays;
    Lips by reflection kissed, and hands hands shook,
    Even by the whiteness each of other took.                        200
      But Hymen now used friendly Morpheus' aid,
    Slew every thief, and rescued every maid:
    And now did his enamour'd passion take
    Heart from his hearty deed, whose worth did make
    His hope of bounteous Eucharis more strong;
    And now came Love with Proteus, who had long
    Juggled the little god with prayers and gifts,
    Ran through all shapes and varied all his shifts,
    To win Love's stay with him, and make him love him.
    And when he saw no strength of sleight could move him,
    To make him love or stay, he nimbly turned                       211
    Into Love's self, he so extremely burned.
    And thus came Love, with Proteus and his power,
    T' encounter Eucharis: first, like the flower
    That Juno's milk did spring,[97] the silver lily,
    He fell on Hymen's hand, who straight did spy
    The bounteous godhead, and with wondrous joy
    Offer'd it Eucharis. She, wonderous coy,
    Drew back her hand: the subtle flower did woo it,
    And, drawing it near, mixed so you could not know it:            220
    As two clear tapers mix in one their light,
    So did the lily and the hand their white.
    She viewed it; and her view the form bestows
    Amongst her spirits; for, as colour flows
    From superficies of each thing we see,
    Even so with colours forms emitted be;
    And where Love's form is, Love is; Love is form:
    He entered at the eye; his sacred storm
    Rose from the hand, Love's sweetest instrument:
    It stirred her blood's sea so, that high it went,                230
    And beat in bashful waves 'gainst the white shore
    Of her divided cheeks; it raged the more,
    Because the tide went 'gainst the haughty wind
    Of her estate and birth: and, as we find,
    In fainting ebbs, the flowery Zephyr hurls
    The green-haired Hellespont, broke in silver curls,
    'Gainst Hero's tower; but in his blast's retreat,
    The waves obeying him, they after beat,
    Leaving the chalky shore a great way pale,
    Then moist it freshly with another gale;                         240
    So ebbed and flowed the blood[98] in Eucharis' face,
    Coyness and Love strived which had greatest grace;
    Virginity did fight on Coyness' side,
    Fear of her parent's frowns and female pride
    Loathing the lower place, more than it loves
    The high contents desert and virtue moves.
    With Love fought Hymen's beauty and his valure,[99]
    Which scarce could so much favour yet allure
    To come to strike, but fameless idle stood:
    Action is fiery valour's sovereign good.                         250
    But Love, once entered, wished no greater aid
    Than he could find within; thought thought betray'd;
    The bribed, but incorrupted, garrison
    Sung "Io Hymen;" there those songs begun,
    And Love was grown so rich with such a gain,
    And wanton with the ease of his free reign,
    That he would turn into her roughest frowns
    To turn them out; and thus he Hymen crowns
    King of his thoughts, man's greatest empery:
    This was his first brave step to deity.                          260
      Home to the mourning city they repair,
    With news as wholesome as the morning air,
    To the sad parents of each savd maid:
    But Hymen and his Eucharis had laid
    This plat[100] to make the flame of their delight
    Round as the moon at full, and full as bright.
      Because the parents of chaste Eucharis
    Exceeding Hymen's so, might cross their bliss;
    And as the world rewards deserts, that law
    Cannot assist with force; so when they saw                       270
    Their daughter safe, take vantage of their own,
    Praise Hymen's valour much, nothing bestown;
    Hymen must leave the virgins in a grove
    Far off from Athens, and go first to prove,
    If to restore them all with fame and life,
    He should enjoy his dearest as his wife.
    This told to all the maids, the most agree:
    The riper sort, knowing what 'tis to be
    The first mouth of a news so far derived,
    And that to hear and bear news brave folks lived.                280
    As being a carriage special hard to bear
    Occurrents, these occurrents being so dear,
    They did with grace protest, they were content
    T' accost their friends with all their compliment,
    For Hymen's good; but to incur their harm,
    There he must pardon them. This wit went warm
    To Adolesche's[101] brain, a nymph born high,
    Made all of voice and fire, that upwards fly:
    Her heart and all her forces' nether train
    Climb'd to her tongue, and thither fell her brain,               290
    Since it could go no higher; and it must go;
    All powers she had, even her tongue, did so:
    In spirit and quickness she much joy did take,
    And loved her tongue, only for quickness' sake;
    And she would haste and tell. The rest all stay:
    Hymen goes one, the nymph another way;
    And what became of her I'll tell at last:
    Yet take her visage now;--moist-lipped, long-faced,
    Thin like an iron wedge, so sharp and tart,
    As 'twere of purpose made to cleave Love's heart:                300
    Well were this lovely beauty rid of her.
    And Hymen did at Athens now prefer
    His welcome suit, which he with joy aspired:
    A hundred princely youths with him retired
    To fetch the nymphs; chariots and music went;
    And home they came: heaven with applauses rent.
    The nuptials straight proceed, whiles all the town,
    Fresh in their joys, might do them most renown.
    First, gold-locked Hymen did to church repair,
    Like a quick offering burned in flames of hair;                  310
    And after, with a virgin firmament
    The godhead-proving bride attended went
    Before them all: she looked in her command,
    As if form-giving Cypria's silver hand
    Gripped all their beauties, and crushed out one flame;
    She blushed to see how beauty overcame
    The thoughts of all men. Next, before her went
    Five lovely children, decked with ornament
    Of her sweet colours, bearing torches by;
    For light was held a happy augury                                320
    Of generation, whose efficient right
    Is nothing else but to produce to light.
    The odd disparent number they did choose,
    To show the union married loves should use,
    Since in two equal parts it will not sever,
    But the midst holds one to rejoin it ever,
    As common to both parts: men therefore deem
    That equal number gods do not esteem,
    Being authors of sweet peace and unity,
    But pleasing to th' infernal empery,                             330
    Under whose ensigns Wars and Discords fight,
    Since an even number you may disunite
    In two parts equal, naught in middle left
    To reunite each part from other reft;
    And five they hold in most especial prize,[102]
    Since 'tis the first odd number that doth rise
    From the two foremost numbers' unity,
    That odd and even are; which are two and three;
    For one no number is; but thence doth flow
    The powerful race of number. Next, did go                        340
    A noble matron, that did spinning bear
    A huswife's rock and spindle, and did wear
    A wether's skin, with all the snowy fleece,
    To intimate that even the daintiest piece
    And noblest-born dame should industrious be:
    That which does good disgraceth no degree.
      And now to Juno's temple they are come,
    Where her grave priest stood in the marriage-room:
    On his right arm did hang a scarlet veil,
    And from his shoulders to the ground did trail,                  350
    On either side, ribands of white and blue:
    With the red veil he hid the bashful hue
    Of the chaste bride, to show the modest shame,
    In coupling with a man, should grace a dame.
    Then took he the disparent silks, and tied
    The lovers by the waists, and side to side,
    In token that thereafter they must bind
    In one self-sacred knot each other's mind.
    Before them on an altar he presented
    Both fire and water, which was first invented,                   360
    Since to ingenerate every human creature
    And every other birth produc'd by Nature,
    Moisture and heat must mix; so man and wife
    For human race must join in nuptial life.
    Then one of Juno's birds, the painted jay,
    He sacrific'd and took the gall away;
    All which he did behind the altar throw,
    In sign no bitterness of hate should grow,
    'Twixt married loves, nor any least disdain.
    Nothing they spake, for 'twas esteem'd too plain                 370
    For the most silken mildness of a maid,
    To let a public audience hear it said,
    She boldly took the man; and so respected
    Was bashfulness in Athens, it erected
    To chaste Agneia,[103] which is Shamefacedness,
    A sacred temple, holding her a goddess.
    And now to feasts, masks, and triumphant shows,
    The shining troops returned, even till earth-throes
    Brought forth with joy the thickest part of night,
    When the sweet nuptial song, that used to cite                   380
    All to their rest, was by Phemone[104] sung,
    First Delphian prophetess, whose graces sprung
    Out of the Muses' well: she sung before
    The bride into her chamber; at which door
    A matron and a torch-bearer did stand:
    A painted box of confits[105] in her hand
    The matron held, and so did other some[106]
    That compassed round the honour'd nuptial room.
    The custom was, that every maid did wear,
    During her maidenhead, a silken sphere                           390
    About her waist, above her inmost weed,
    Knit with Minerva's knot, and that was freed
    By the fair bridegroom on the marriage-night,
    With many ceremonies of delight:
    And yet eternized Hymen's tender bride,
    To suffer it dissolved so, sweetly cried.
    The maids that heard, so loved and did adore her,
    They wished with all their hearts to suffer for her.
    So had the matrons, that with confits stood
    About the chamber, such affectionate blood,                      400
    And so true feeling of her harmless pains,
    That every one a shower of confits rains;
    For which the bride-youths scrambling on the ground,
    In noise of that sweet hail her[107] cries were drown'd.
    And thus blest Hymen joyed his gracious bride,
    And for his joy was after deified.
    The saffron mirror by which Phoebus' love,
    Green Tellus, decks her, now he held above
    The cloudy mountains: and the noble maid,
    Sharp-visaged Adolesche, that was stray'd                        410
    Out of her way, in hasting with her news,
    Not till this[108] hour th' Athenian turrets views;
    And now brought home by guides, she heard by all,
    That her long kept occurrents would be stale,
    And how fair Hymen's honours did excel
    For those rare news which she came short to tell.
    To hear her dear tongue robbed of such a joy,
    Made the well-spoken nymph take such a toy,[109]
    That down she sunk: when lightning from above
    Shrunk her lean body, and, for mere free love,                   420
    Turn'd her into the pied-plum'd Psittacus,
    That now the Parrot is surnam'd by us,
    Who still with counterfeit confusion prates
    Naught but news common to the common'st mates.--
    This told, strange Teras touch'd her lute, and sung
    This ditty, that the torchy evening sprung.


_Epithalamion Teratos._

    Come, come, dear Night! Love's mart of kisses,
      Sweet close to his ambitious line,
    The fruitful summer of his blisses!
      Love's glory doth in darkness shine.                           430
    O come, soft rest of cares! come, Night!
      Come, naked Virtue's only tire,
    The reapd harvest of the light,
      Bound up in sheaves of sacred fire!
                Love calls to war;
                  Sighs his alarms,
                Lips his swords are,
                  The field his arms.

    Come, Night, and lay thy velvet hand
      On glorious Day's outfacing face;                              440
    And all thy crownd flames command,
      For torches to our nuptial grace!
                Love calls to war;
                  Sighs his alarms,
                Lips his swords are,
                  The field his arms.

    No need have we of factious Day,
      To cast, in envy of thy peace,
    Her balls of discord in thy way:
      Here Beauty's day doth never cease;                            450
    Day is abstracted here,
    And varied in a triple sphere.
    Hero, Alcmane, Mya, so outshine thee,
    Ere thou come here, let Thetis thrice refine thee.
            Love calls to war;
              Sighs his alarms,
            Lips his swords are,
              The field his arms.

            The evening star I see:
              Rise, youths! the evening star                         460
              Helps Love to summon war;
            Both now embracing be.
    Rise, youths! Love's rite claims more than banquets; rise!
    Now the bright marigolds, that deck the skies,
    Phoebus' celestial flowers, that, contrary
    To his flowers here, ope when he shuts his eye,
    And shuts when he doth open, crown your sports:
    Now Love in Night, and Night in Love exhorts
    Courtship and dances: all your parts employ,
    And suit Night's rich expansure with your joy.                   470
    Love paints his longings in sweet virgins' eyes:
    Rise, youths! Love's rite claims more than banquets; rise!

      Rise, virgins! let fair nuptial loves enfold
    Your fruitless breasts: the maidenheads[110] ye hold
    Are not your own alone, but parted are;
    Part in disposing them your parents share,
    And that a third part is; so must ye save
    Your loves a third, and you your thirds must have.
    Love paints his longings in sweet virgins' eyes:
    Rise, youths! Love's rite claims more than banquets; rise!       480

      Herewith the amorous spirit, that was so kind
    To Teras' hair, and comb'd it down with wind,
    Still as it, comet-like, brake from her brain,
    Would needs have Teras gone, and did refrain
    To blow it down: which, staring[111] up, dismay'd
    The timorous feast; and she no longer stay'd;
    But, bowing to the bridegroom and the bride,
    Did, like a shooting exhalation, glide
    Out of their sights: the turning of her back
    Made them all shriek, it look'd so ghastly black.                490
    O hapless Hero! that most hapless cloud
    Thy soon-succeeding tragedy foreshow'd.
    Thus all the nuptial crew to joys depart;
    But much-wronged[112] Hero stood Hell's blackest dart:
    Whose wound because I grieve so to display,
    I use digressions thus t' increase the day.

FOOTNOTES:

[92] Some modern editors read "sat."

[93] Singer suggested "Alcmaeon."

[94] "Chapman has a passage very similar to this in his _Widow's Tears_,
Act iv.:--

    'Wine is ordained to raise such hearts as sink:
    Whom woful stars distemper let him drink.'"

--_Broughton._

[95] "Old eds. 'prayes,' 'praies,' 'preies,' and 'pryes.'"--_Dyce._

[96] Dyce reads "enthrill'd" (a word that I do not remember to have
seen).

[97] Did make to spring. Cf. Fourth Sestiad, l. 169.

[98] So the Isham copy. All other editions omit the words "the blood."

[99] "Valure" is frequently found as a form of "value;" but I suspect,
with Dyce, that it is here put (_metri causa_) for "valour."

[100] Plot.

[101] Gr. [Greek: adoleschs].

[102] Some eds. "price."

[103] Gr. [Greek: hagneia]

[104] Singer gives a reference to Pausan, x. 5.--Old eds. "Phemonor" and
"Phemoner."

[105] Comfits.

[106] "Other some" is a not uncommon form of expression. See Halliwell's
_Dict. of Archaic and Provincial Words_.

[107] Old eds. "their."

[108] Old eds. "his."

[109] A sudden pettishness or freak of fancy. Cf. _Two Noble Kinsmen_:--

        "The hot horse hot as fire
    _Took toy_ at this."

[110] Former editors have not noticed that Chapman is here closely
imitating Catullus' _Carmen Nuptiale_--

    "Virginitas non tota tua est: ex parte parentum est:
    Tertia pars patri data, pars data tertia matri,
    Tertia sola tua est: noli pugnare duobus,
    Qui genero sua jura simul cum dote dederunt."

[111] Some eds. "starting." Cf. _Julius Csar_, iv. 3, ll. 278-9--

    "Art thou some god, some angel, or some devil,
    That makest my blood cold and my hair to _stare_?"

[112] "Old eds. 'much-rong,' 'much rongd,' and 'much-wrong'd.'"--_Dyce_
(who reads "much-wrung").




THE SIXTH SESTIAD.

_The Argument of the Sixth Sestiad._


        Leucote flies to all the Winds,
        And from the Fates their outrage blinds,[113]
        That Hero and her love may meet.
        Leander, with Love's complete fleet
        Manned in himself, puts forth to seas;
        When straight the ruthless Destinies,
        With, At, stir the winds to war
        Upon the Hellespont: their jar
        Drowns poor Leander. Hero's eyes,
        Wet witnesses of his surprise,                                10
        Her torch blown out, grief casts her down
        Upon her love, and both doth drown:
        In whose just ruth the god of seas
        Transforms them to th' Acanthides.

    No longer could the Day nor Destinies
    Delay the Night, who now did frowning rise
    Into her throne; and at her humorous breasts
    Visions and Dreams lay sucking: all men's rests
    Fell like the mists of death upon their eyes,
    Day's too-long darts so kill'd their faculties.
    The Winds yet, like the flowers, to cease began;
    For bright Leucote, Venus' whitest swan,
    That held sweet Hero dear, spread her fair wings,
    Like to a field of snow, and message brings                       10
    From Venus to the Fates, t'entreat them lay
    Their charge upon the Winds their rage to stay,
    That the stern battle of the seas might cease,
    And guard Leander to his love in peace.
    The Fates consent;--ay me, dissembling Fates!
    They showed their favours to conceal their hates,
    And draw Leander on, lest seas too high
    Should stay his too obsequious destiny:
    Who[114] like a fleering slavish parasite,
    In warping profit or a traitorous sleight,                        20
    Hoops round his rotten body with devotes,
    And pricks his descant face full of false notes;
    Praising with open throat, and oaths as foul
    As his false heart, the beauty of an owl;
    Kissing his skipping hand with charmd skips,
    That cannot leave, but leaps upon his lips
    Like a cock-sparrow, or a shameless quean
    Sharp at a red-lipp'd youth, and naught doth mean
    Of all his antic shows, but doth repair
    More tender fawns,[115] and takes a scatter'd hair                30
    From his tame subject's shoulder; whips and calls
    For everything he lacks; creeps 'gainst the walls
    With backward humbless, to give needless way:
    Thus his false fate did with Leander play.
      First to black Eurus flies the white Leucote
    (Born 'mongst the negroes in the Levant sea,
    On whose curl'd head[s] the glowing sun doth rise),
    And shows the sovereign will of Destinies,
    To have him cease his blasts; and down he lies.
    Next, to the fenny Notus course she holds,                        40
    And found him leaning, with his arms in folds,
    Upon a rock, his white hair full of showers;
    And him she chargeth by the fatal powers,
    To hold in his wet cheeks his cloudy voice.
    To Zephyr then that doth in flowers rejoice:
    To snake-foot Boreas next she did remove,
    And found him tossing of his ravished love,[116]
    To heat his frosty bosom hid in snow;
    Who with Leucote's sight did cease to blow.
    Thus all were still to Hero's heart's desire;                     50
    Who with all speed did consecrate a fire
    Of flaming gums and comfortable spice,
    To light her torch, which in such curious price
    She held, being object to Leander's sight,
    That naught but fires perfumed must give it light.
    She loved it so, she griev'd to see it burn,
    Since it would waste, and soon to ashes turn:
    Yet, if it burned not, 'twere not worth her eyes;
    What made it nothing, gave it all the prize.
    Sweet torch, true glass of our society!                           60
    What man does good, but he consumes thereby?
    But thou wert loved for good, held high, given show;
    Poor virtue loathed for good, obscured, held low:
    Do good, be pined,--be deedless good, disgraced;
    Unless we feed on men, we let them fast.
    Yet Hero with these thoughts her torch did spend:
    When bees make wax, Nature doth not intend
    It should be made a torch; but we, that know
    The proper virtue of it, make it so,
    And, when 'tis made, we light it: nor did Nature                  70
    Propose one life to maids; but each such creature
    Makes by her soul the best of her free[117] state,
    Which without love is rude, disconsolate,
    And wants love's fire to make it mild and bright,
    Till when, maids are but torches wanting light.
    Thus 'gainst our grief, not cause of grief, we fight:
    The right of naught is glean'd, but the delight.
    Up went she: but to tell how she descended,
    Would God she were dead, or my verse ended!
    She was the rule of wishes, sum, and end,                         80
    For all the parts that did on love depend:
    Yet cast the torch his brightness further forth;
    But what shines nearest best, holds truest worth.
    Leander did not through such tempests swim
    To kiss the torch, although it lighted him:
    But all his powers in her desires awakd,
    Her love and virtues clothed him richly naked.
    Men kiss but fire that only shows pursue;
    Her torch and Hero, figure show and virtue.
      Now at opposed Abydos naught was heard                          90
    But bleating flocks, and many a bellowing herd,
    Slain for the nuptials; cracks of falling woods;
    Blows of broad axes; pourings out of floods.
    The guilty Hellespont was mix'd and stained
    With bloody torrents[118] that the shambles rained;
    Not arguments of feast, but shows that bled,
    Foretelling that red night that followd.
    More blood was spilt, more honours were addrest,
    Than could have gracd any happy feast;
    Rich banquets, triumphs, every pomp employs                      100
    His sumptuous hand; no miser's nuptial joys.
    Air felt continual thunder with the noise
    Made in the general marriage-violence;
    And no man knew the cause of this expense,
    But the two hapless lords, Leander's sire,
    And poor Leander, poorest where the fire
    Of credulous love made him most rich surmis'd:
    As short was he of that himself[119] he prized,
    As is an empty gallant full of form,
    That thinks each look an act, each drop a storm,                 110
    That falls from his brave breathings; most brought up
    In our metropolis, and hath his cup
    Brought after him to feasts; and much palm bears
    For his rare judgment in th' attire he wears;
    Hath seen the hot Low-Countries, not their heat,
    Observes their rampires and their buildings yet;
    And, for your sweet discourse with mouths, is heard
    Giving instructions with his very beard;
    Hath gone with an ambassador, and been
    A great man's mate in travelling, even to Rhene;                 120
    And then puts all his worth in such a face
    As he saw brave men make, and strives for grace
    To get his news forth: as when you descry
    A ship, with all her sail contends to fly
    Out of the narrow Thames with winds unapt,
    Now crosseth here, then there, then this way rapt,
    And then hath one point reach'd, then alters all,
    And to another crookd reach doth fall
    Of half a bird-bolt's[120] shoot, keeping more coil
    Than if she danc'd upon the ocean's toil;                        130
    So serious is his trifling company,
    In all his swelling ship of vacantry
    And so short of himself in his high thought
    Was our Leander in his fortunes brought,
    And in his fort of love that he thought won;
    But otherwise he scorns comparison.
      O sweet Leander, thy large worth I hide
    In a short grave! ill-favour'd storms must chide
    Thy sacred favour;[121] I in floods of ink
    Must drown thy graces, which white papers drink,                 140
    Even as thy beauties did the foul black seas;
    I must describe the hell of thy decease,
    That heaven did merit: yet I needs must see
    Our painted fools and cockhorse peasantry
    Still, still usurp, with long lives, loves, and lust,
    The seats of Virtue, cutting short as dust
    Her dear-bought issue: ill to worse converts,
    And tramples in the blood of all deserts.
      Night close and silent now goes fast before
    The captains and the soldiers to the shore,                      150
    On whom attended the appointed fleet
    At Sestos' bay, that should Leander meet,
    Who feigned he in another ship would pass:
    Which must not be, for no one mean there was
    To get his love home, but the course he took.
    Forth did his beauty for his beauty look,
    And saw her through her torch, as you behold
    Sometimes within the sun a face of gold,
    Formed in strong thoughts, by that tradition's force
    That says a god sits there and guides his course.                160
    His sister was with him; to whom he show'd
    His guide by sea, and said, "Oft have you view'd
    In one heaven many stars, but never yet
    In one star many heavens till now were met.
    See, lovely sister! see, now Hero shines,
    No heaven but her appears; each star repines,
    And all are clad in clouds, as if they mourned
    To be by influence of earth out-burned.
    Yet doth she shine, and teacheth Virtue's train
    Still to be constant in hell's blackest reign,                   170
    Though even the gods themselves do so entreat them
    As they did hate, and earth as she would eat them."
      Off went his silken robe, and in he leapt,
    Whom the kind waves so licorously cleapt,[122]
    Thickening for haste, one in another, so,
    To kiss his skin, that he might almost go
    To Hero's tower, had that kind minute lasted.
    But now the cruel Fates with At hasted
    To all the winds, and made them battle fight
    Upon the Hellespont, for either's right                          180
    Pretended to the windy monarchy;
    And forth they brake, the seas mixed with the sky,
    And tossed distressed Leander, being in hell,
    As high as heaven: bliss not in height doth dwell.
    The Destinies sate dancing on the waves,
    To see the glorious Winds with mutual braves
    Consume each other: O, true glass, to see
    How ruinous ambitious statists be
    To their own glories! Poor Leander cried
    For help to sea-born Venus she denied;                           190
    To Boreas, that, for his Attha's[123] sake
    He would some pity on his Hero take,
    And for his own love's sake, on his desires;
    But Glory never blows cold Pity's fires.
    Then call'd he Neptune, who, through all the noise,
    Knew with affright his wreck'd Leander's voice,
    And up he rose; for haste his forehead hit
    'Gainst heaven's hard crystal; his proud waves he smit
    With his forked sceptre, that could not obey;
    Much greater powers than Neptune's gave them sway.               200
    They loved Leander so, in groans they brake
    When they came near him; and such space did take
    'Twixt one another, loath to issue on,
    That in their shallow furrows earth was shown,
    And the poor lover took a little breath:
    But the curst Fates sate spinning of his death
    On every wave, and with the servile Winds
    Tumbled them on him. And now Hero finds,
    By that she felt, her dear Leander's state:
    She wept, and prayed for him to every Fate;                      210
    And every Wind that whipped her with her hair
    About the face, she kissed and spake it fair,
    Kneeled to it, gave it drink out of her eyes
    To quench his thirst: but still their cruelties
    Even her poor torch envied, and rudely beat
    The baiting[124] flame from that dear food it eat;
    Dear, for it nourish'd her Leander's life;
    Which with her robe she rescued from their strife;
    But silk too soft was such hard hearts to break;
    And she, dear soul, even as her silk, faint, weak,               220
    Could not preserve it; out, O, out it went!
    Leander still call'd Neptune, that now rent
    His brackish curls, and tore his wrinkled face,
    Where tears in billows did each other chase;
    And, burst with ruth, he hurl'd his marble mace
    At the stern Fates: it wounded Lachesis
    That drew Leander's thread, and could not miss
    The thread itself, as it her hand did hit,
    But smote it full, and quite did sunder it.
    The more kind Neptune raged, the more he razed                   230
    His love's life's fort, and kill'd as he embraced:
    Anger doth still his own mishap increase;
    If any comfort live, it is in peace.
    O thievish Fates, to let blood, flesh, and sense,
    Build two fair temples for their excellence,
    To robe it with a poisoned influence!
    Though souls' gifts starve, the bodies are held dear
    In ugliest things; sense-sport preserves a bear:
    But here naught serves our turns: O heaven and earth,
    How most-most wretched is our human birth!                       240
    And now did all the tyrannous crew depart,
    Knowing there was a storm in Hero's heart,
    Greater than they could make, and scorn'd their smart.
    She bow'd herself so low out of her tower,
    That wonder 'twas she fell not ere her hour,
    With searching the lamenting waves for him:
    Like a poor snail, her gentle supple limb
    Hung on her turret's top, so most downright,
    As she would dive beneath the darkness quite,
    To find her jewel;--jewel!--her Leander,                         250
    A name of all earth's jewels pleas'd not her
    Like his dear name: "Leander, still my choice,
    Come naught but my Leander! O my voice,
    Turn to Leander! henceforth be all sounds,
    Accents and phrases, that show all griefs' wounds,
    Analyzed in Leander! O black change!
    Trumpets, do you, with thunder of your clange,
    Drive out this change's horror! My voice faints:
    Where all joy was, now shriek out all complaints!"
    Thus cried she; for her mixd soul could tell                    260
    Her love was dead: and when the Morning fell
    Prostrate upon the weeping earth for woe,
    Blushes, that bled out of her cheeks, did show
    Leander brought by Neptune, bruis'd and torn
    With cities' ruins he to rocks had worn,
    To filthy usuring rocks, that would have blood,
    Though they could get of him no other good.
    She saw him, and the sight was much-much more
    Than might have serv'd to kill her: should her store
    Of giant sorrows speak?--Burst,--die,--bleed,                    270
    And leave poor plaints to us that shall succeed.
    She fell on her love's bosom, hugged it fast,
    And with Leander's name she breathed her last.
      Neptune for pity in his arms did take them,
    Flung them into the air, and did awake them
    Like two sweet birds, surnam'd th' Acanthides,
    Which we call Thistle-warps, that near no seas
    Dare ever come, but still in couples fly,
    And feed on thistle-tops, to testify
    The hardness of their first life in their last;                  280
    The first, in thorns of love, that sorrows past:
    And so most beautiful their colours show,
    As none (so little) like them; her sad brow
    A sable velvet feather covers quite,
    Even like the forehead-cloth that, in the night,
    Or when they sorrow, ladies use[125] to wear:
    Their wings, blue, red, and yellow, mixed appear:
    Colours that, as we construe colours, paint
    Their states to life;--the yellow shows their saint,
    The dainty[126] Venus, left them; blue their truth;              290
    The red and black, ensigns of death and ruth.
    And this true honour from their love-death sprung,--
    They were the first that ever poet sung.[127]

FOOTNOTES:

[113] It should be _binds_: _i.e._, "Leucote flies to the several winds,
and, commissioned by the Fates, commands them to restrain their
violence." _Broughton._

[114] The next few lines are in Chapman's obscurest manner. "Devotes,"
in l. 21, means, I suppose, "tokens of devotion to his patron."

[115] Cunningham says, "I cannot perceive the meaning of 'doth repair
more tender fawns.'" "Fawns" is equivalent to "fawnings;" and the
meaning seems to be, "applies himself to softer blandishments."

[116] Orithyia.--The story of the rape of Orithyia is told in a
magnificent passage of Mr. Swinburne's _Erectheus_.

[117] So the Isham copy. Later eds. "true."

[118] So the Isham copy. Later eds. "torrent."

[119] Some eds. "himselfe surpris'd." Dyce gives "himself so priz'd."

[120] A short arrow blunted at the end; it killed birds without piercing
them.

[121] Countenance.

[122] Clipt, embraced.

[123] From Gr. [Greek: Atthis] (a woman of Attica, _i.e._, Orithyia).

[124] "The flame taking _bait_ (refreshment), feeding." Dyce. (Old eds.
"bating.")

[125] Old eds. "vsde."

[126] Isham copy "deuil."

[127] In Chapman's day the work of the grammarian Musaeus was supposed
to be the genuine production of the fabulous son of Eumolpus.




OVID'S ELEGIES.




All the old editions of Marlowe's translation of the _Amores_ are
undated, and bear the imprint Middleburgh (in various spellings). It is
probable that the copy which Mr. Charles Edmonds discovered at Lamport
Hall, Northamptonshire (the seat of Sir Charles Isham, Bart.), is the
earliest of extant editions. The title-page of this edition
is--_Epigrammes and Elegies By I. D. and C. M. At Middleborugh_ 12mo.
After the title-page come the _Epigrammata_, which are signed at the end
"I. D." (the initials of Sir John Davies). Following the _Epigrammata_
is a copy of verses headed _Ignoto_, and then comes a second
title-page--_Certaine of Ovid's Elegies. By C. Marlowe. At
Middleborough_. In his preface to a facsimile reprint of the little
volume, Mr. Edmonds states his conviction that this edition,
notwithstanding the imprint Middleborough, was issued at London from the
press of W. Jaggard, who in 1599 printed the _Passionate Pilgrime_. He
grounds his opinion not only on the character of the type and of the
misprints, but on the fact that there would be no need for the book to
be printed abroad in the first instance. It was not (he thinks) until
after June 1599--when (with other books) it was condemned by Archbishop
Whitgift to be burnt--that recourse was had to the expedient of
reprinting it at Middleburgh. In the notes I refer to this edition as
Isham copy.

The next edition, which has the same title-pages as the Isham
copy--_Epigrammes and Elegies by I. D. and C. M. at Middleborugh_,
12mo--was certainly, to judge from its general appearance, printed
abroad, and by foreigners. The text agrees in the main with that of the
Isham copy, but the corruptions are more numerous. I have followed Dyce
in referring to this edition as Ed. A.

The Isham copy and Ed. A contain only a portion of the Elegies. The
complete translation appeared in _All Ovid's Elegies: 3 Bookes. By C. M.
Epigrams by I. D. At Middleborugh_, 12mo. (Ed. B); and in another
edition with the same title-page (Ed. C). The readings of Ed. C. I have
occasionally borrowed from Dyce. It is supposed that the book "continued
to be printed with Middleburgh on the title, and without date, as late
as 1640" (Hazlitt).




OVID'S ELEGIES.

P. OVIDII NASONIS AMORUM.

LIBER PRIMUS.




ELEGIA I.

Quemadmodum a Cupidine, pro bellis amoris scribere coactus sit.


    _We which were Ovid's five books, now are three,
    For these before the rest preferreth he:
    If reading five thou plain'st of tediousness,
    Two ta'en away, thy[128] labour will be less;_

    With Muse prepared,[129] I meant to sing of arms,
    Choosing a subject fit for fierce alarms:
    Both verses were alike till Love (men say)
    Began to smile and took one foot away.
    Rash boy, who gave thee power to change a line?
    We are the Muses' prophets, none of thine.
    What, if thy mother take Diana's[130] bow,
    Shall Dian fan when love begins to glow?
    In woody groves is't meet that Ceres reign,
    And quiver-bearing Dian till the plain?                           10
    Who'll set the fair-tressed Sun in battle-ray
    While Mars doth take the Aonian harp to play?
    Great are thy kingdoms, over-strong and large,
    Ambitious imp, why seek'st thou further charge?
    Are all things thine? the Muses' Tempe thine?
    Then scarce can Phoebus say, "This harp is mine."
    When[131] in this work's first verse I trod aloft,
    Love slaked my muse, and made my numbers soft:
    I have no mistress nor no favourite,
    Being fittest matter for a wanton wit.                            20
    Thus I complained, but Love unlocked his quiver,
    Took out the shaft, ordained my heart to shiver,
    And bent his sinewy bow upon his knee,
    Saying, "Poet, here's a work beseeming thee."
    O, woe is me! he never shoots but hits,
    I burn, love in my idle bosom sits:
    Let my first verse be six, my last five feet:
    Farewell stern war, for blunter poets meet!
    Elegian muse, that warblest amorous lays,
    Girt my shine[132] brow with seabank myrtle sprays.[133]          30

FOOTNOTES:

[128] So the Isham copy. Ed. A. "the."

[129] Isham copy and ed. A. "vpreard, I meane."

[130] The original has--

    "Quid? si prripiat flav Venus arma _Minerv_
      Ventilet accensas flav _Minerva_ comas."

[131]

    "Cum bene surrexit versu nova pagina, primo!
          At tenuat nervos proximus ille meos."

[132] Sheen.

[133] Dyce's correction for "praise" of the old eds.




ELEGIA II.

Quod primo amore correptus, in triumphum duci se a Cupidine patiatur.


    What makes my bed seem hard seeing it is soft?
    Or why slips down the coverlet so oft?
    Although the nights be long I sleep not tho[134]
    My sides are sore with tumbling to and fro.
    Were love the cause it's like I should descry him,
    Or lies he close and shoots where none can spy him?
    'Twas so; he strook me with a slender dart;
    'Tis cruel Love turmoils my captive heart.
    Yielding or striving[135] do we give him might,
    Let's yield, a burden easily borne is light.                      10
    I saw a brandished fire increase in strength,
    Which being not shak'd, I saw it die at length.
    Young oxen newly yoked are beaten more,
    Than oxen which have drawn the plough before:
    And rough jades' mouths with stubborn bits are torn,
    But managed horses' heads are lightly borne.[136]
    Unwilling lovers, love doth more torment,
    Than such as in their bondage feel content.
    Lo! I confess, I am thy captive I,
    And hold my conquered hands for thee to tie.                      20
    What need'st thou war? I sue to thee for grace:
    With arms to conquer armless men is base.
    Yoke Venus' Doves, put myrtle on thy hair,
    Vulcan will give thee chariots rich and fair:
    The people thee applauding, thou shalt stand,
    Guiding the harmless pigeons with thy hand.
    Young men and women shalt thou lead as thrall,
    So will thy triumph seem magnifical;
    I, lately caught, will have a new-made wound,
    And captive-like be manacled and bound:                           30
    Good meaning, Shame, and such as seek Love's wrack
    Shall follow thee, their hands tied at their back.
    Thee all shall fear, and worship as a king
    I triumphing shall thy people sing.
    Smooth speeches, Fear and Rage shall by thee ride,
    Which troops have always been on Cupid's side;
    Thou with these soldiers conquer'st gods and men,
    Take these away, where is thine honour then?
    Thy mother shall from heaven applaud this show,
    And on their faces heaps of roses strow,                          40
    With beauty of thy wings, thy fair hair gilded,[137]
    Ride golden Love in chariots richly builded!
    Unless I err, full many shalt thou burn,
    And give wounds infinite at every turn.
    In spite of thee, forth will thine arrows fly,
    A scorching flame burns all the standers by.
    So, having conquered Inde, was Bacchus' hue;
    Thee pompous birds and him two tigers drew;
    Then seeing I grace thy show in following thee,
    Forbear to hurt thyself in spoiling me.                           50
    Behold thy kinsman[138] Csar's prosperous bands,
    Who guards the[139] conquered with his conquering hands.

FOOTNOTES:

[134] Then.

[135] So the Isham copy and ed. A. Other eds. "struggling."

[136] "_Frena minus sentit_ quisquis ad arma facit."--Marlowe's line
strongly supports the view that "bear hard" in _Julius Csar_ means
"curb, keep a tight rein over" (hence "eye with suspicion"). Cf.
Christopher Clifford's _School of Horsemanship_ (1585):--"But the most
part of horses takes it [a 'wil of his owne'] through the unskilfulnesse
of the rider by _bearing too hard a hand_ upon them," p. 35.

[137] "Our poet's copy of Ovid had 'Tu _penna pulchros gemina_ variante
capillos.'"--_Dyce._ (The true reading "Tu pennas gemma, gemma, variante
capillos.")

[138] Old eds. "kinsmans."

[139] Old eds. "thee."




ELEGIA III.

Ad amicam.


    I ask but right, let her that caught me late,
    Either love, or cause that I may never hate;
    I crave[140] too much--would she but let me love her;
    Jove knows with such-like prayers I daily move her.
    Accept him that shall serve thee all his youth,
    Accept him that shall love with spotless truth.
    If lofty titles cannot make[141] me thine,
    That am descended but of knightly line,
    (Soon may you plough the little land I have;
    I gladly grant my parents given to save;[142])                    10
    Apollo, Bacchus, and the Muses may;
    And Cupid who hath marked me for thy prey;
    My spotless life, which but to gods gives place,
    Naked simplicity, and modest grace.
    I love but one, and her I love change never,
    If men have faith, I'll live with thee for ever.
    The years that fatal Destiny shall give
    I'll live with thee, and die ere thou shalt grieve.
    Be thou the happy subject of my books
    That I may write things worthy thy fair looks.                    20
    By verses, horned I got her name;
    And she to whom in shape of swan[143] Jove came;
    And she that on a feigned Bull swam to land,
    Griping his false horns with her virgin hand,
    So likewise we will through the world be rung
    And with my name shall thine be always sung.

FOOTNOTES:

[140] Isham copy "aske."

[141] Ed. A. "cause me to be thine."

[142] "Temperat et sumptus parcus uterque parens."

[143] Isham copy and ed. A. "Bull."




ELEGIA IV.[144]

Amicam, qua arte quibusque nutibus in cna, presente viro, uti debeat,
admonet.


    Thy husband to a banquet goes with me,
    Pray God it may his latest supper be.
    Shall I sit gazing as a bashful guest,
    While others touch the damsel I love best?
    Wilt lying under him, his bosom clip?
    About thy neck shall he at pleasure skip?
    Marvel not, though the fair bride did incite
    The drunken Centaurs to a sudden fight.
    I am no half horse, nor in woods I dwell,
    Yet scarce my hands from thee contain I well.                     10
    But how thou should'st behave thyself now know,
    Nor let the winds away my warnings blow.
    Before thy husband come, though I not see
    What may be done, yet there before him be.
    Lie with him gently, when his limbs he spread
    Upon the bed; but on my foot first tread.
    View me, my becks, and speaking countenance;
    Take, and return[145] each secret amorous glance.
    Words without voice shall on my eyebrows sit,
    Lines thou shalt read in wine by my hand writ.                    20
    When our lascivious toys come to thy mind,
    Thy rosy cheeks be to thy thumb inclined.
    If aught of me thou speak'st in inward thought,
    Let thy soft finger to thy ear be brought.
    When I, my light, do or say aught that please thee,
    Turn round thy gold ring, as it were to ease thee.
    Strike on the board like them that pray for evil,
    When thou dost wish thy husband at the devil.[146]
    What wine he fills thee, wisely will[147] him drink;
    Ask thou the boy, what thou enough dost think.                    30
    When thou hast tasted, I will take the cup,
    And where thou drink'st, on that part I will sup.
    If he gives thee what first himself did taste,
    Even in his face his offered gobbets[148] cast.
    Let not thy neck by his vile arms be prest,
    Nor lean thy soft head on his boisterous breast.
    Thy bosom's roseate buds let him not finger,
    Chiefly on thy lips let not his lips linger
    If thou givest kisses, I shall all disclose,[149]
    Say they are mine, and hands on thee impose.                      40
    Yet this I'll see, but if thy gown aught cover,
    Suspicious fear in all my veins will hover.
    Mingle not thighs, nor to his leg join thine,
    Nor thy soft foot with his hard foot combine.
    I have been wanton, therefore am perplexed,
    And with mistrust of the like measure vexed.
    I and my wench oft under clothes did lurk,
    When pleasure moved us to our sweetest work.
    Do not thou so; but throw thy mantle hence,
    Lest I should think thee guilty of offence.                       50
    Entreat thy husband drink, but do not kiss,
    And while he drinks, to add more do not miss;
    If he lies down with wine and sleep opprest,
    The thing and place shall counsel us the rest.
    When to go homewards we rise all along
    Have care to walk in middle of the throng.
    There will I find thee or be found by thee,
    There touch whatever thou canst touch of me.
    Ay me! I warn what profits some few hours!
    But we must part, when heaven with black night lours.             60
    At night thy husband clips[150] thee: I will weep
    And to the doors sight of thyself [will] keep:
    Then will he kiss thee, and not only kiss,
    But force thee give him my stolen honey-bliss.
    Constrained against thy will give it the peasant,
    Forbear sweet words, and be your sport unpleasant.
    To him I pray it no delight may bring,
    Or if it do, to thee no joy thence spring.
    But, though this night thy fortune be to try it,
    To me to-morrow constantly deny[151] it.                          70

FOOTNOTES:

[144] Not in Isham copy or ed. A.

[145] So Dyce; old eds. "receive."

[146] "Optabis merito cum mala multa viro."

[147] "Bibat ipse _jubeto_."

[148] So Dyce for "goblets" of the old eds. ("Rejice libatos illius ore
_cibos_.")

[149] "Fiam manifestus adulter."

[150] The original has "Nocte vir _includet_."

[151] "Dedisse nega."




ELEGIA V.

Corinn concubitus.


    In summer's heat, and mid-time of the day,
    To rest my limbs upon a bed I lay;
    One window shut, the other open stood,
    Which gave such light as twinkles in a wood,
    Like twilight glimpse at setting of the sun,
    Or night being past, and yet not day begun;
    Such light to shamefaced maidens must be shown
    Where they may sport, and seem to be unknown:
    Then came Corinna in a long loose gown,
    Her white neck hid with tresses hanging down,                     10
    Resembling fair Semiramis going to bed,
    Or Lais of a thousand wooers sped.[152]
    I snatched her gown: being thin, the harm was small,
    Yet strived she to be covered therewithal;
    And striving thus, as one that would be cast,
    Betrayed herself, and yielded at the last.
    Stark naked as she stood before mine eye,
    Not one wen in her body could I spy.
    What arms and shoulders did I touch and see!
    How apt her breasts were to be pressed by me!                     20
    How smooth a belly under her waist saw I,
    How large a leg, and what a lusty thigh!
    To leave the rest, all liked me passing well;
    I clinged her naked[153] body, down she fell:
    Judge you the rest; being tired she bade me kiss;
    Jove send me more such afternoons as this!

FOOTNOTES:

[152] Isham copy and ed. A. "spread."

[153] Ed. A. "her faire white body." ("Et _nudam_ pressi corpus ad usque
meum.")




ELEGIA VI.[154]

Ad Janitorem, ut fores sibi aperiat.


    Unworthy porter, bound in chains full sore,
    On movd hooks set ope the churlish door.
    Little I ask, a little entrance make,
    The gate half-ope my bent side in will take.
    Long love my body to such use make[s] slender,
    And to get out doth like apt members render.
    He shows me how unheard to pass the watch,
    And guides my feet lest, stumbling, falls they catch:
    But in times past I feared vain shades, and night,
    Wondering if any walkd without light.                            10
    Love, hearing it, laughed with his tender mother,
    And smiling said, "Be thou as bold as other."
    Forthwith love came; no dark night-flying sprite,
    Nor hands prepared to slaughter, me affright.
    Thee fear I too much: only thee I flatter:
    Thy lightning can my life in pieces batter.
    Why enviest me? this hostile den[155] unbar;
    See how the gates with my tears watered are!
    When thou stood'st naked ready to be beat,
    For thee I did thy mistress fair entreat.                         20
    But what entreats for thee sometimes[156] took place,
    (O mischief!) now for me obtain small grace.
    Gratis thou mayest be free; give like for like;
    Night goes away: the door's bar backward strike.
    Strike; so again hard chains shall bind thee never,
    Nor servile water shalt thou drink for ever.
    Hard-hearted Porter, dost and wilt not hear?
    With stiff oak propped the gate doth still appear.
    Such rampired gates besiegd cities aid;
    In midst of peace why art of arms afraid?                         30
    Exclud'st a lover, how would'st use a foe?
    Strike back the bar, night fast away doth go.
    With arms or armd men I come not guarded;
    I am alone, were furious love discarded.
    Although I would, I cannot him cashier,
    Before I be divided from my gear.[157]
    See Love with me, wine moderate in my brain,
    And on my hairs a crown of flowers remain.
    Who fears these arms? who will not go to meet them?
    Night runs away; with open entrance greet them.                   40
    Art careless? or is't sleep forbids thee hear,
    Giving the winds my words running in thine ear?
    Well I remember, when I first did hire thee,
    Watching till after midnight did not tire thee.
    But now perchance thy wench with thee doth rest,
    Ah, how thy lot is above my lot blest:
    Though it be so, shut me not out therefore;
    Night goes away: I pray thee ope the door.
    Err we? or do the turnd hinges sound,
    And opening doors with creaking noise abound?[158]                50
    We err: a strong blast seemed the gates to ope:
    Ay me, how high that gale did lift my hope!
    If Boreas bears[159] Orithyia's rape in mind,
    Come break these deaf doors with thy boisterous wind.
    Silent the city is: night's dewy host[160]
    March fast away: the bar strike from the post.
    Or I more stern than fire or sword will turn,
    And with my brand these gorgeous houses burn.
    Night, love, and wine to all extremes persuade:
    Night, shameless wine, and love are fearless made.                60
    All have I spent: no threats or prayers move thee;
    O harder than the doors thou guard'st I prove thee,
    No pretty wench's keeper may'st thou be,
    The careful prison is more meet for thee.
    Now frosty night her flight begins to take,
    And crowing cocks poor souls to work awake.
    But thou, my crown, from sad hairs ta'en away,
    On this hard threshold till the morning lay.
    That when my mistress there beholds thee cast,
    She may perceive how we the time did waste.                       70
    Whate'er thou art, farewell, be like me pained!
    Careless farewell, with my fault not distained![161]
    And farewell cruel posts, rough threshold's block,
    And doors conjoined with an hard iron lock!

FOOTNOTES:

[154] Not in Isham copy or ed. A.

[155] Old eds. "dende."

[156] Sometime ("quondam").

[157] "Ante vel a membris dividar ipse meis."

[158] Qy. "rebound?"

[159] Dyce reads, "If, Boreas, bear'st" (_i.e._, "thou bear'st"). But
the change in the old eds. from the second to the third person is not
very harsh.

[160] A picturesque rendering of

              "Vitreoque madentia rore
    Tempora noctis eunt."

[161] "Lente nec admisso turpis amante ... vale." Of course "nec" should
be taken with "admisso."




ELEGIA VII.[162]

Ad pacandam amicam, quam verberaverat.


    Bind fast my hands, they have deservd chains,
    While rage is absent, take some friend the pains.
    For rage against my wench moved my rash arm,
    My mistress weeps whom my mad hand did harm.
    I might have then my parents dear misused,
    Or holy gods with cruel strokes abused.
    Why, Ajax, master of the seven-fold shield,
    Butchered the flocks he found in spacious field.
    And he who on his mother venged his ire,
    Against the Destinies durst sharp[163] darts require.             10
    Could I therefore her comely tresses tear?
    Yet was she gracd with her ruffled hair.
    So fair she was, Atalanta she resembled,
    Before whose bow th' Arcadian wild beasts trembled.
    Such Ariadne was, when she bewails,
    Her perjured Theseus' flying vows and sails.
    So, chaste Minerva, did Cassandra fall
    Deflowered[164] except within thy temple wall.
    That I was mad, and barbarous all men cried:
    She nothing said; pale fear her tongue had tied.                  20
    But secretly her looks with checks did trounce me,
    Her tears, she silent, guilty did pronounce me.
    Would of mine arms my shoulders had been scanted:
    Better I could part of myself have wanted.
    To mine own self have I had strength so furious,
    And to myself could I be so injurious?
    Slaughter and mischiefs instruments, no better,
    Deservd chains these cursed hands shall fetter.
    Punished I am, if I a Roman beat:
    Over my mistress is my right more great?                          30
    Tydides left worst signs[165] of villainy;
    He first a goddess struck: another I.
    Yet he harmed less; whom I professed to love
    I harmed: a foe did Diomede's anger move.
    Go now, thou conqueror, glorious triumphs raise,
    Pay vows to Jove; engirt thy hairs with bays.
    And let the troops which shall thy chariot follow,
    "I, a strong man conquered this wench," hollow.
    Let the sad captive foremost, with locks spread
    On her white neck, but for hurt cheeks,[166] be led.              40
    Meeter it were her lips were blue with kissing,
    And on her neck a wanton's[167] mark not missing.
    But, though I like a swelling flood was driven,
    And as a prey unto blind anger given,
    Was't not enough the fearful wench to chide?
    Nor thunder, in rough threatenings, haughty pride?
    Nor shamefully her coat pull o'er her crown,
    Which to her waist her girdle still kept down?
    But cruelly her tresses having rent,
    My nails to scratch her lovely cheeks I bent.                     50
    Sighing she stood, her bloodless white looks shewed,
    Like marble from the Parian mountains hewed.
    Her half-dead joints, and trembling limbs I saw,
    Like poplar leaves blown with a stormy flaw.
    Or slender ears, with gentle zephyr shaken,
    Or waters' tops with the warm south-wind taken.
    And down her cheeks, the trickling tears did flow,
    Like water gushing from consuming snow.
    Then first I did perceive I had offended;
    My blood the tears were that from her descended.                  60
    Before her feet thrice prostrate down I fell,
    My feard hands thrice back she did repel.
    But doubt thou not (revenge doth grief appease),
    With thy sharp nails upon my face to seize;
    Bescratch mine eyes, spare not my locks to break
    (Anger will help thy hands though ne'er so weak);
    And lest the sad signs of my crime remain,
    Put in their place thy kembd[168] hairs again.

FOOTNOTES:

[162] Not in Isham copy or ed. A.

[163] I should like to omit this word, to which there is nothing to
correspond in the original.

[164] Marlowe has misunderstood the original "Sic nisi vittatis quod
erat Cassandra capillis."

[165] "Pessima Tydides scelerum monumenta reliquit."

[166] An awkward translation of

    "Si sinerent ls, candidia tota, gen."

[167] So ed. B.--Ed. C. "wanton."

[168] Old eds. "keembed." ("Pone recompositas in statione comas.")




ELEGIA VIII.[169]

Execratur lenam qu puellam suam meretricis arte instituebat.


    There is--whoe'er will know a bawd aright,
    Give ear--there is an old trot Dipsas hight.[170]
    Her name comes from the thing: she being wise,[171]
    Sees not the morn on rosy horses rise,
    She magic arts and Thessal charms doth know,
    And makes large streams back to their fountains flow;
    She knows with grass, with threads on wrung[172] wheels spun,
    And what with mares' rank humour[173] may be done.
    When she will, cloudes the darkened heaven obscure,
    When she will, day shines everywhere most pure.                   10
    If I have faith, I saw the stars drop blood,
    The purple moon with sanguine visage stood;
    Her I suspect among night's spirits to fly,
    And her old body in birds' plumes to lie.
    Fame saith as I suspect; and in her eyes,
    Two eyeballs shine, and double light thence flies.
    Great grandsires from their ancient graves she chides,
    And with long charms the solid earth divides.
    She draws chaste women to incontinence,
    Nor doth her tongue want harmful eloquence.                       20
    By chance I heard her talk; these words she said,
    While closely hid betwixt two doors I laid.
    "Mistress, thou knowest thou hast a blest youth pleased,
    He stayed and on thy looks his gazes seized.
    And why should'st not please; none thy face exceeds;
    Ay me, thy body hath no worthy weeds!
    As thou art fair, would thou wert fortunate!
    Wert thou rich, poor should not be my state.
    Th' opposd star of Mars hath done thee harm;
    Now Mars is gone, Venus thy side doth warm,                       30
    And brings good fortune; a rich lover plants
    His love on thee, and can supply thy wants.
    Such is his form as may with thine compare,
    Would he not buy thee, thou for him should'st care."[174]
    She blushed: "Red shame becomes white cheeks; but this
    If feigned, doth well; if true, it doth amiss.
    When on thy lap thine eyes thou dost deject,
    Each one according to his gifts respect.
    Perhaps the Sabines rude, when Tatius reigned
    To yield their love to more than one disdained.                   40
    Now Mars doth rage abroad without all pity,
    And Venus rules in her neas' city.
    Fair women play; she's chaste whom none will have
    Or, but for bashfulness, herself would crave.
    Shake off these wrinkles that thy front assault;
    Wrinkles in beauty is a grievous fault.
    Penelope in bows her youths' strength tried,
    Of horn the bow was that approved[175] their side.
    Time flying slides hence closely, and deceives us,
    And with swift horses the swift year[176] soon leaves us.         50
    Brass shines with use; good garments would[177] be worn;
    Houses not dwelt in, are with filth forlorn.
    Beauty, not exercised, with age is spent,
    Nor one or two men are sufficient.
    Many to rob is more sure, and less hateful,
    From dog-kept flocks come preys to wolves most grateful.
    Behold, what gives the poet but new verses?
    And therefore many thousand he rehearses.
    The poet's god arrayed in robes of gold,
    Of his gilt harp the well-tuned strings doth hold.                60
    Let Homer yield to such as presents bring,
    (Trust me) to give, it is a witty thing.
    Nor, so thou may'st obtain a wealthy prize,
    The vain name of inferior slaves despise.
    Nor let the arms of ancient lines[178] beguile thee;
    Poor lover, with thy grandsires I exile thee.
    Who seeks, for being fair, a night to have,
    What he will give, with greater instance crave.
    Make a small price, while thou thy nets dost lay;
    Lest they should fly; being ta'en, the tyrant play.               70
    Dissemble so, as loved he may be thought,
    And take heed lest he gets that love for naught.
    Deny him oft; feign now thy head doth ache:
    And Isis now will show what 'scuse to make.
    Receive him soon, lest patient use he gain,
    Or lest his love oft beaten back should wane.
    To beggars shut, to bringers ope thy gate;
    Let him within hear barred-out lovers prate.
    And, as first wronged, the wrongd sometimes banish;
    Thy fault with his fault so repulsed will vanish.                 80
    But never give a spacious time to ire;
    Anger delayed doth oft to hate retire.
    And let thine eyes constraind learn to weep,
    That this or that man may thy cheeks moist keep.
    Nor, if thou cozenest one, dread to forswear,
    Venus to mocked men lends a senseless ear.
    Servants fit for thy purpose thou must hire,
    To teach thy lover what thy thoughts desire.
    Let them ask somewhat; many asking little,
    Within a while great heaps grow of a tittle.                      90
    And sister, nurse, and mother spare him not;
    By many hands great wealth is quickly got.
    When causes fail thee to require a gift
    By keeping of thy birth, make but a shift.
    Beware lest he, unrivalled, loves secure;
    Take strife away, love doth not well endure.
    On all the bed men's tumbling[179] let him view,
    And thy neck with lascivious marks made blue.
    Chiefly show him the gifts, which others send:
    If he gives nothing, let him from thee wend.                     100
    When thou hast so much as he gives no more,
    Pray him to lend what thou may'st ne'er restore.
    Let thy tongue flatter, while thy mind harm works;
    Under sweet honey deadly poison lurks.
    If this thou dost, to me by long use known,
    (Nor let my words be with the winds hence blown)
    Oft thou wilt say, 'live well;' thou wilt pray oft,
    That my dead bones may in their grave lie soft."
    As thus she spake, my shadow me betrayed;
    With much ado my hands I scarcely stayed;                        110
    But her blear eyes, bald scalp's thin hoary fleeces,
    And rivelled[180] cheeks I would have pulled a-pieces.
    The gods send thee no house, a poor old age,
    Perpetual thirst, and winter's lasting rage.

FOOTNOTES:

[169] Not in Isham copy or ed A.

[170] "Est qudam, nomine Dipsas, anus."

[171]

          "Nigri non illa parentem
    Memnonis in roseis sobria vidit equis."

Cunningham suggests that "wise" was "one of the thousand and one
euphemisms for 'inebriated.'"

[172] The spelling in old eds. is "wrong."

[173]

    "Virus amantis equ."

[174] "Si te non emptam vellet emendus erat." (Marlowe's copy must have
read "amandus.")

[175] Proved their strength. "Qui _latus argueret_ corneus arcus erat."

[176] The usual reading is "_Ut_ celer admissis labitur _amnis aquis_."

[177] "Vestis bona _quaerit haberi_."

[178] Old eds. "liues."

[179] "Ille viri toto videat _vestigia_ lecto."

[180] "_Rugosas_ genas."




ELEGIA IX.[181]

Ad Atticum, amantem non oportere desidiosum esse, sicuti nec militem.


    All lovers war, and Cupid hath his tent;
    Attic, all lovers are to war far sent,
    What age fits Mars, with Venus doth agree;
    'Tis shame for eld in war or love to be.
    What years in soldiers captains do require,
    Those in their lovers pretty maids desire.
    Both of them watch: each on the hard earth sleeps:
    His mistress' door this, that his captain's keeps.
    Soldiers must travel far: the wench forth send,[182]
    Her valiant lover follows without end.                            10
    Mounts, and rain-doubled floods he passeth over,
    And treads the desert snowy heaps do[183] cover.
    Going to sea, east winds he doth not chide,
    Nor to hoist sail attends fit time and tide.
    Who but a soldier or a lover's bold
    To suffer storm-mixed snows with night's sharp cold?
    One as a spy doth to his enemies go,
    The other eyes his rival as his foe.
    He cities great, this thresholds lies before:
    This breaks town gates, but he his mistress' door.                20
    Oft to invade the sleeping foe 'tis good,
    And armed to shed unarmd people's blood.
    So the fierce troops of Thracian Rhesus fell,
    And captive horses bade their lord farewell.
    Sooth,[184] lovers watch till sleep the husband charms,
    Who slumbering, they rise up in swelling arms.
    The keepers' hands[185] and corps-du-gard to pass,
    The soldier's, and poor lover's work e'er was.
    Doubtful is war and love; the vanquished rise,
    And who thou never think'st should fall, down lies.               30
    Therefore whoe'er love slothfulness doth call,
    Let him surcease: love tries wit best of all.
    Achilles burned, Briseis being ta'en away;
    Trojans destroy the Greek wealth, while you may.
    Hector to arms went from his wife's embraces,
    And on Andromache[186] his helmet laces.
    Great Agamemnon was, men say, amazed,
    On Priam's loose-trest daughter when he gazed.
    Mars in the deed the blacksmith's net did stable;
    In heaven was never more notorious fable.                         40
    Myself was dull and faint, to sloth inclined;
    Pleasure and ease had mollified my mind.
    A fair maid's care expelled this sluggishness,
    And to her tents willed me myself address.
    Since may'st thou see me watch and night-wars move:
    He that will not grow slothful, let him love.

FOOTNOTES:

[181] Not in Isham copy or ed. A.

[182] "Mitte puellam."

[183] Old eds. "to."

[184] So ed. B.--Ed. C "such."

[185] "Custodum transire _manus_ vigilumque catervas." (For "hands" the
poet should have written "bands.")

[186] "Et galeam capiti quae daret uxor erat."




ELEGIA X.[187]

Ad puellam, ne pro amore prmia poscat.

    Such as the cause was of two husbands' war,
    Whom Trojan ships fetch'd from Europa far,
    Such as was Leda, whom the god deluded
    In snow-white plumes of a false swan included.
    Such as Amymone through the dry fields strayed,
    When on her head a water pitcher laid.
    Such wert thou, and I feared the bull and eagle,
    And whate'er Love made Jove, should thee inveigle.
    Now all fear with my mind's hot love abates:
    No more this beauty mine eyes captivates.                         10
    Ask'st why I change? because thou crav'st reward;
    This cause hath thee from pleasing me debarred.
    While thou wert plain[188] I loved thy mind and face:
    Now inward faults thy outward form disgrace.
    Love is a naked boy, his years saunce[189] stain,
    And hath no clothes, but open doth remain.
    Will you for gain have Cupid sell himself?
    He hath no bosom where to hide base pelf.
    Love[190] and Love's son are with fierce arms at[191] odds;
    To serve for pay beseems not wanton gods.                         20
    The whore stands to be bought for each man's money,
    And seeks vild wealth by selling of her coney.
    Yet greedy bawd's command she curseth still,
    And doth, constrained, what you do of goodwill.
    Take from irrational beasts a precedent;
    'Tis shame their wits should be more excellent.
    The mare asks not the horse, the cow the bull,
    Nor the mild ewe gifts from the ram doth pull.
    Only a woman gets spoils from a man,
    Farms out herself on nights for what she can;                     30
    And lets[192] what both delight, what both desire,
    Making her joy according to her hire.
    The sport being such, as both alike sweet try it,
    Why should one sell it and the other buy it?
    Why should I lose, and thou gain by the pleasure,
    Which man and woman reap in equal measure?
    Knights of the post[193] of perjuries make sale,
    The unjust judge for bribes becomes a stale.
    'Tis shame sold tongues the guilty should defend,
    Or great wealth from a judgment-seat ascend.                      40
    'Tis shame to grow rich by bed-merchandise,[194]
    Or prostitute thy beauty for bad price.
    Thanks worthily are due for things unbought;
    For beds ill-hired we are indebted nought.
    The hirer payeth all; his rent discharged,
    From further duty he rests then enlarged.
    Fair dames forbear rewards for nights to crave:
    Ill-gotten goods good end will never have.
    The Sabine gauntlets were too dearly won,
    That unto death did press the holy nun.                           50
    The son slew her, that forth to meet him went,
    And a rich necklace caused that punishment.
    Yet think no scorn to ask a wealthy churl;
    He wants no gifts into thy lap to hurl.
    Take clustered grapes from an o'er-laden vine,
    May[195] bounteous love[196] Alcinous' fruit resign.
    Let poor men show their service, faith and care;
    All for their mistress, what they have, prepare.
    In verse to praise kind wenches 'tis my part,
    And whom I like eternise by mine art.                             60
    Garments do wear, jewels and gold do waste,
    The fame that verse gives doth for ever last.
    To give I love, but to be asked disdain;
    Leave asking, and I'll give what I refrain.

FOOTNOTES:

[187] Not in Isham copy or ed. A.

[188] "Simplex."

[189] Sans.

[190] "Nec _Venus_ apta," &c.

[191] Old eds. "to."

[192] "Vendit."

[193] "Non bene conducti testes."

[194] So ed. B.--ed. C "bad merchandise."

[195] Old eds. "many."

[196] The original has "ager."




ELEGIA XI.[197]

Napen alloquitur, ut paratas tabellas ad Corinnam perferat.


    In skilful gathering ruffled hairs in order,
    Nap, free-born, whose cunning hath no border,[198]
    Thy service for night's scapes is known commodious,
    And to give signs dull wit to thee is odious.[199]
    Corinna clips me oft by thy persuasion:
    Never to harm me made thy faith evasion.
    Receive these lines; them to my mistress carry;
    Be sedulous; let no stay cause thee tarry,
    Nor flint nor iron are in thy soft breast,
    But pure simplicity in thee doth rest.                            10
    And 'tis supposed Love's bow hath wounded thee;
    Defend the ensigns of thy war in me.
    If what I do, she asks, say "hope for night;"
    The rest my hand doth in my letters write.
    Time passeth while I speak; give her my writ,
    But see that forthwith she peruseth it.
    I charge thee mark her eyes and front in reading:
    By speechless looks we guess at things succeeding.
    Straight being read, will her to write much back,
    I hate fair paper should writ matter lack.                        20
    Let her make verses and some blotted letter
    On the last edge to stay mine eyes the better.
    What needs she tire[200] her hand to hold the quill?
    Let this word "Come," alone the tables fill.
    Then with triumphant laurel will I grace them
    And in the midst of Venus' temple place them,
    Subscribing, that to her I consecrate
    My faithful tables, being vile maple late.

FOOTNOTES:

[197] Not in Isham copy or ed. A.

[198] Bound.

[199] "Et dandis ingeniosa notis."

[200] So Dyce for "try" of the old eds.




ELEGIA XII.[201]

Tabellas quas miserat execratur quod amica noctem negabat.


    Bewail my chance: the sad book is returned,
    This day denial hath my sport adjourned.
    Presages are not vain; when she departed,
    Nap by stumbling on the threshold, started.
    Going out again, pass forth the door more wisely,
    And somewhat higher bear thy foot precisely.
    Hence luckless tables! funeral wood, be flying!
    And thou, the wax, stuffed full with notes denying!
    Which I think gathered from cold hemlock's flower,
    Wherein bad honey Corsic bees did pour:                           10
    Yet as if mixed with red lead thou wert ruddy,
    That colour rightly did appear so bloody.
    As evil wood, thrown in the highways, lie,
    Be broke with wheels of chariots passing by!
    And him that hewed you out for needful uses,
    I'll prove had hands impure with all abuses.
    Poor wretches on the tree themselves did strangle:
    There sat the hangman for men's necks to angle.
    To hoarse scrich-owls foul shadows it allows;
    Vultures and Furies[202] nestled in the boughs.                   20
    To these my love I foolishly committed,
    And then with sweet words to my mistress fitted.
    More fitly had they[203] wrangling bonds contained
    From barbarous lips of some attorney strained.
    Among day-books and bills they had lain better,
    In which the merchant wails his bankrupt debtor.
    Your name approves you made for such like things,
    The number two no good divining brings.
    Angry, I pray that rotten age you racks,
    And sluttish white-mould overgrow the wax.                        30

FOOTNOTES:

[201] Not in Isham copy or ed. A.

[202] "Volturis in ramis et _strigis_ ova tulit."

[203] Old eds. "thy."




ELEGIA XIII.

Ad Auroram ne properet.


    Now o'er the sea from her old love comes she
    That draws the day from heaven's cold axletree.
    Aurora, whither slid'st thou? down again!
    And birds for[204] Memnon yearly shall be slain.
    Now in her tender arms I sweetly bide,
    If ever, now well lies she by my side.
    The air is cold, and sleep is sweetest now,
    And birds send forth shrill notes from every bough.
    Whither runn'st thou, that men and women love not?
    Hold in thy rosy horses that they move not.                       10
    Ere thou rise, stars teach seamen where to sail,
    But when thou com'st, they of their courses fail.
    Poor travellers though tired, rise at thy sight,
    And[205] soldiers make them ready to the fight.
    The painful hind by thee to field is sent;
    Slow oxen early in the yoke are pent.
    Thou coz'nest boys of sleep, and dost betray them
    To pedants that with cruel lashes pay them.
    Thou mak'st the surety to the lawyer run,
    That with one word hath nigh himself undone.                      20
    The lawyer and the client hate thy view,
    Both whom thou raisest up to toil anew.
    By thy means women of their rest are barred,
    Thou settst their labouring hands to spin and card.
    All[206] could I bear; but that the wench should rise,
    Who can endure, save him with whom none lies?
    How oft wished I night would not give thee place,
    Nor morning stars shun thy uprising face.
    How oft that either wind would break thy coach,
    Or steeds might fall, forced with thick clouds' approach.         30
    Whither go'st thou, hateful nymph? Memnon the elf
    Received his coal-black colour from thyself.
    Say that thy love with Cephalus were not known,
    Then thinkest thou thy loose life is not shown?
    Would Tithon might but talk of thee awhile!
    Not one in heaven should be more base and vile.
    Thou leav'st his bed, because he's faint through age,
    And early mount'st thy hateful carriage:
    But held'st[207] thou in thy arms some Cephalus,
    Then would'st thou cry, "Stay night, and run not thus."           40
    Dost punish[208] me because years make him wane?
    I did not bid thee wed an agd swain.
    The moon sleeps with Endymion every day;
    Thou art as fair as she, then kiss and play.
    Jove, that thou should'st not haste but wait his leisure,
    Made two nights one to finish up his pleasure.
    I chid[209] no more; she blushed, and therefore heard me,
    Yet lingered not the day, but morning scared me.

FOOTNOTES:

[204] So Dyce for "from" of the old eds.

[205] This line is omitted in ed. A.

[206] Isham copy and ed. A "This."

[207] Isham copy and ed. A "had'st."

[208] Isham copy and ed. A "Punish ye me."

[209] So the Isham copy. The other old eds. "chide."




ELEGIA XIV.[210]

Puellam consolatur cui pr nimia cura com deciderant.


    Leave colouring thy tresses, I did cry;
    Now hast thou left no hairs at all to dye.
    But what had been more fair had they been kept?
    Beyond thy robes thy dangling locks had swept.
    Fear'dst thou to dress them being fine and thin,
    Like to the silk the curious[211] Seres spin.
    Or threads which spider's slender foot draws out,
    Fastening her light web some old beam about?
    Not black nor golden were they to our view,
    Yet although [n]either, mixed of either's hue;                    10
    Such as in hilly Ida's watery plains,
    The cedar tall, spoiled of his bark, retains.
    Add[212] they were apt to curl a hundred ways,
    And did to thee no cause of dolour raise.
    Nor hath the needle, or the comb's teeth reft them,
    The maid that kembed them ever safely left them.
    Oft was she dressed before mine eyes, yet never,
    Snatching the comb to beat the wench, outdrive her.
    Oft in the morn, her hairs not yet digested,
    Half-sleeping on a purple bed she rested;                         20
    Yet seemly like a Thracian Bacchanal,
    That tired doth rashly[213] on the green grass fall.
    When they were slender and like downy moss,
    Thy[214] troubled hairs, alas, endured great loss.
    How patiently hot irons they did take,
    In crookd trannels[215] crispy curls to make.
    I cried, "'Tis sin, 'tis sin, these hairs to burn,
    They well become thee, then to spare them turn.
    Far off be force, no fire to them may reach,
    Thy very hairs will the hot bodkin teach."                        30
    Lost are the goodly locks, which from their crown,
    Phoebus and Bacchus wished were hanging down.
    Such were they as Diana[216] painted stands,
    All naked holding in her wave-moist hands.
    Why dost thy ill-kembed tresses' loss lament?
    Why in thy glass dost look, being discontent?
    Be not to see with wonted eyes inclined;
    To please thyself, thyself put out of mind.
    No charmd herbs of any harlot scathed thee,
    No faithless witch in Thessal waters bathed thee.                 40
    No sickness harmed thee (far be that away!),
    No envious tongue wrought thy thick locks' decay.
    By thine own hand and fault thy hurt doth grow,
    Thou mad'st thy head with compound poison flow.
    Now Germany shall captive hair-tires send thee,
    And vanquished people curious dressings lend thee.
    Which some admiring, O thou oft wilt blush!
    And say, "He likes me for my borrowed bush.
    Praising for me some unknown Guelder[217] dame,
    But I remember when it was my fame."                              50
    Alas she almost weeps, and her white cheeks,
    Dyed red with shame to hide from shame she seeks.
    She holds, and views her old locks in her lap;
    Ay me! rare gifts unworthy such a hap!
    Cheer up thyself, thy loss thou may'st repair,
    And be hereafter seen with native hair.

FOOTNOTES:

[210] Not in Isham copy or ed. A.

[211] The original has "colorati Seres."

[212] So ed. B.--Ed. C "And."

[213] "Temere."

[214] Old eds. "They."

[215] Cunningham and the editor of 1826 may be right in reading
"trammels" (_i.e._ ringlets). "Trannel" was the name for a bodkin. (The
original has "Ut fieret torto flexilis orbe sinus.")

[216] "Nuda _Dione_."

[217] "Nescio quam pro me laudat nunc iste _Sygambram_."




ELEGIA XV.

Ad invidos, quod fama poetarum sit perennis.


    Envy, why carp'st thou my time's spent so ill?
    And term'st[218] my works fruits of an idle quill?
    Or that unlike the line from whence I sprung[219]
    War's dusty honours are refused being young?
    Nor that I study not the brawling laws,
    Nor set my voice to sail in every cause?
    Thy scope is mortal; mine, eternal fame.
    That all the world may[220] ever chant my name.
    Homer shall live while Tenedos stands and Ide,
    Or to[221] the sea swift Simois shall[222] slide.                 10
    Ascrus lives while grapes with new wine swell,
    Or men with crookd sickles corn down fell.
    The[223] world shall of Callimachus ever speak;
    His art excelled, although his wit was weak.
    For ever lasts high Sophocles' proud vein,
    With sun and moon Aratus shall remain.
    While bondmen cheat, fathers [be] hard,[224] bawds whorish,
    And strumpets flatter, shall Menander flourish.
    Rude Ennius, and Plautus[225] full of wit,
    Are both in Fame's eternal legend writ.                           20
    What age of Varro's name shall not be told,
    And Jason's Argo,[226] and the fleece of gold?
    Lofty Lucretius shall live that hour,
    That nature shall dissolve this earthly bower.
    neas' war and Tityrus shall be read,
    While Rome of all the conquered[227] world is head.
    Till Cupid's bow, and fiery shafts be broken,
    Thy verses, sweet Tibullus, shall be spoken.
    And Gallus shall be known from East to West,
    So shall Lycoris whom he lovd best.                              30
    Therefore when flint and iron wear away,
    Verse is immortal and shall ne'er decay.
    To[228] verse let kings give place and kingly shows,
    And banks o'er which gold-bearing Tagus flows.
    Let base-conceited wits admire vild things;
    Fair Phoebus lead me to the Muses' springs.
    About my head be quivering myrtle wound,
    And in sad lovers' heads let me be found.
    The living, not the dead, can envy bite,
    For after death all men receive their right.                      40
    Then though death racks[229] my bones in funeral fire,
    I'll live, and as he pulls me down mount higher.


The same, by B. I.[230]

    Envy, why twitt'st thou me, my time's spent ill?
    And call'st my verse fruits of an idle quill?
    Or that (unlike the line from whence I sprung)
    War's dusty honours I pursue not young?
    Or that I study not the tedious laws;
    And prostitute my voice in every cause?
    Thy scope is mortal; mine eternal fame,
    Which through the world shall ever chant my name.
    Homer will live, whilst Tenedos stands, and Ide,
    Or to the sea, fleet Symois doth slide:                           10
    And so shall Hesiod too, while vines do bear,
    Or crookd sickles crop the ripened ear.
    Callimachus, though in invention low,
    Shall still be sung, since he in art doth flow;
    No loss shall come to Sophocles' proud vein;
    With sun and moon Aratus shall remain.
    Whilst slaves be false, fathers hard, and bawds be whorish,
    Whilst harlots flatter, shall Meander flourish.
    Ennius, though rude, and Accius' high-reared strain,
    A fresh applause in every age shall gain.                         20
    Of Varro's name, what ear shall not be told?
    Of Jason's Argo and the fleece of gold?
    Then, shall Lucretius' lofty numbers die,
    When earth, and seas in fire and flames shall fry.
    Tityrus, Tillage, ney shall be read,[231]
    Whilst Rome of all the conquered world is head.
    Till Cupid's fires be out, and his bow broken,
    Thy verses, neat Tibulus, shall be spoken.
    Our Gallus shall be known from East to West,
    So shall Lycoris, whom he now loves best.                         30
    The suffering ploughshare or the flint may wear,
    But heavenly poesy no death can fear.
    Kings shall give place to it, and kingly shows,
    The banks o'er which gold-bearing Tagus flows.
    Kneel hinds to trash: me let bright Phoebus swell,
    With cups full flowing from the Muses' well.
    The frost-drad[232] myrtle shall impale my head,
    And of sad lovers I'll be often read.
    Envy the living, not the dead doth bite,
    For after death all men receive their right.                      40
    Then when this body falls in funeral fire,
    My name shall live, and my best part aspire.

FOOTNOTES:

[218] Isham copy and ed. A "tearmes our."

[219] Dyce's correction for "come" of the old eds.

[220] Isham copy and ed. A "might."

[221] So Isham copy and ed. A.--Dyce follows ed. B, "Or into sea."

[222] So old eds.--Dyce "doth."

[223] Isham copy and ed. A omit this line and the next.

[224] So Dyce.--Old eds. "fathers hoord." ("_Durus_ pater.")

[225] The poet must have read "animosi _Maccius_ oris." The true reading
is "animosique _Accius_ oris."

[226] Old eds. "Argos."

[227] Isham copy and ed. A "conquering."

[228] Isham copy and ed. A "Let kings give place to verse."

[229] So the Isham copy.--Ed. A (followed by Dyce) gives "rocks."--Eds.
B and C "rakes" (and so Cunningham).

[230] _I.e._ Ben Jonson, who afterwards introduced it into the
_Poetaster_ (I. 1). This version is merely a revision of the preceding,
which must also have been written by Ben Jonson.

[231] "Tityrus et fruges neaque arma legentur."

[232] "Metuentem frigora myrtum."




P. OVIDII NASONIS AMORUM.

LIBER SECUNDUS.




ELEGIA I.[233]

Quod pro gigantomachia amores scribere sit coactus.


    I, Ovid, poet, of my[234] wantonness,
    Born at Peligny, to write more address.
    So Cupid wills. Far hence be the severe!
    You are unapt my looser lines to hear.
    Let maids whom hot desire to husbands lead,[235]
    And rude boys, touched with unknown love, me read:
    That some youth hurt, as I am, with Love's bow,
    His own flame's best-acquainted signs may know.
    And long admiring say, "By what means learned,
    Hath this same poet my sad chance discern'd?"                     10
    I durst the great celestial battles tell,
    Hundred-hand Gyges, and had done it well;
    With Earth's revenge, and how Olympus top
    High Ossa bore, Mount Pelion up to prop;
    Jove and Jove's thunderbolts I had in hand,
    Which for[236] his heaven fell on the giants' band.
    My wench her door shut, Jove's affairs I left,
    Even Jove himself out of my wit was reft.
    Pardon me, Jove! thy weapons aid me nought,
    Her shut gates greater lightning than thine brought.              20
    Toys, and light elegies, my darts I took,
    Quickly soft words hard doors wide-open strook.
    Verses reduce the hornd bloody moon,
    And call the sun's white horses back[237] at noon.
    Snakes leap by verse from caves of broken mountains,[238]
    And turnd streams run backward to their fountains.
    Verses ope doors; and locks put in the post,
    Although of oak, to yield to verses boast.
    What helps it me of fierce Achill to sing?
    What good to me will either Ajax bring?                           30
    Or he who warred and wandered twenty year?
    Or woful Hector whom wild jades did tear?
    But when I praise a pretty wench's face,
    She in requital doth me oft embrace.
    A great reward! Heroes of[239] famous names
    Farewell! your favour nought my mind inflames.
    Wenches apply your fair looks to my verse,
    Which golden Love doth unto me rehearse.

FOOTNOTES:

[233] Not in Isham copy or ed. A.

[234] Old eds. "thy."

[235] A clear instance of a plural verb following a singular subject.

[236] "Quod bene pro coelo mitteret ille suo."

[237] Old eds. "blacke."

[238] "Carmine dissiliunt, _abruptis faucibus_, angues." ("Fauces" means
both "jaw" and "mountain-gorge." Marlowe has gone desperately wrong.)

[239] Old eds. "O."




ELEGIA II.[240]

Ad Bagoum, ut custodiam puell sibi commiss laxiorem habeat.


    Bagous, whose care doth thy[241] mistress bridle,
    While I speak some few, yet fit words, be idle.
    I saw the damsel walking yesterday,
    There, where the porch doth Danaus' fact[242] display:
    She pleased me soon; I sent, and did her woo;
    Her trembling hand writ back she might not do.
    And asking why, this answer she redoubled,
    Because thy care too much thy mistress troubled.
    Keeper, if thou be wise, cease hate to cherish,
    Believe me, whom we fear, we wish to perish.                      10
    Nor is her husband wise: what needs defence,
    When unprotected[243] there is no expense?
    But furiously he follow[244] his love's fire,
    And thinks her chaste whom many do desire:
    Stolen liberty she may by thee obtain,
    Which giving her, she may give thee again:
    Wilt thou her fault learn? she may make thee tremble.
    Fear to be guilty, then thou may'st dissemble.
    Think when she reads, her mother letters sent her:
    Let him go forth known, that unknown did enter.                   20
    Let him go see her though she do not languish,
    And then report her sick and full of anguish.
    If long she stays, to think the time more short,
    Lay down thy forehead in thy lap to snort.
    Inquire not what with Isis may be done,
    Nor fear lest she to the thetres run.
    Knowing her scapes, thine honour shall increase;
    And what less labour than to hold thy peace?
    Let him please, haunt the house, be kindly used,
    Enjoy the wench; let all else be refused.                         30
    Vain causes feign of him, the true to hide,
    And what she likes, let both hold ratified.
    When most her husband bends the brows and frowns,
    His fawning wench with her desire he crowns.
    But yet sometimes to chide thee let her fall
    Counterfeit tears: and thee lewd hangman call.
    Object thou then, what she may well excuse,
    To stain all faith in truth, by false crimes' use.
    Of wealth and honour so shall grow thy heap:
    Do this, and soon thou shalt thy freedom reap.                    40
    On tell-tales' necks thou seest the link-knit chains,
    The filthy prison faithless breasts restrains.
    Water in waters, and fruit, flying touch,
    Tantalus seeks, his long tongue's gain is such.
    While Juno's watchman I too much eyed,
    Him timeless[245] death took, she was deified.
    I saw one's legs with fetters black and blue,
    By whom the husband his wife's incest[246] knew:
    More he deserved; to both great harm he framed,
    The man did grieve, the woman was defamed.                        50
    Trust me all husbands for such faults are sad,
    Nor make they any man that hears them glad.
    If he loves not, deaf ears thou dost importune,
    Or if he loves, thy tale breeds his misfortune.
    Nor is it easy proved though manifest;
    She safe by favour of her judge doth rest.
    Though himself see, he'll credit her denial,
    Condemn his eyes, and say there is no trial.
    Spying his mistress' tears he will lament
    And say "This blab shall suffer punishment."                      60
    Why fight'st 'gainst odds? to thee, being cast, do hap
    Sharp stripes; she sitteth in the judge's lap.
    To meet for poison or vild facts[247] we crave not;
    My hands an unsheathed shining weapon have not.
    We seek that, through thee, safely love we may;
    What can be easier than the thing we pray?

FOOTNOTES:

[240] Not in Isham copy or ed. "A."

[241] So ed. B.--Ed. C "my."

[242] The original has "agmen." Cunningham suggests "pack." If we retain
"fact" the meaning is "Danaus' guilt."

[243] Old eds. "vn-protested." ("Unde nihil, quamvis non tueare,
perit.")

[244] So ed. B.--Ed. C "follows." (The sense wanted is "Furiously let
him follow" &c.)

[245] "Ante suos annos occidit."

[246] "Unde vir incestum scire coactus erat." (Here "incestum" is
"adultery.")

[247] "Scelus."




ELEGIA III.[248]

Ad Eunuchum servantem dominam.


    Ay me, an eunuch keeps my mistress chaste,
    That cannot Venus' mutual pleasure taste.
    Who first deprived young boys of their best part,
    With self-same wounds he gave, he ought to smart.
    To kind requests thou would'st more gentle prove,
    If ever wench had made lukewarm thy love:
    Thou wert not born to ride, or arms to bear,
    Thy hands agree not with the warlike spear.
    Men handle those; all manly hopes resign,
    Thy mistress' ensigns must be likewise thine.                     10
    Please her--her hate makes others thee abhor;
    If she discards thee, what use serv'st thou for?
    Good form there is, years apt to play together:
    Unmeet is beauty without use to wither.
    She may deceive thee, though thou her protect;
    What two determine never wants effect.
    Our prayers move thee to assist our drift,
    While thou hast time yet to bestow that gift.

FOOTNOTES:

[248] Not in Isham copy or ed. A.




ELEGIA IV.

Quod amet mulieres, cujuscunque form sint.


    I mean not to defend the scapes[249] of any,
    Or justify my vices being many;
    For I confess, if that might merit favour,
    Here I display my lewd and loose behaviour.
    I loathe, yet after that I loathe I run:
    Oh, how the burthen irks, that we should[250] shun.
    I cannot rule myself but where Love please;
    Am[251] driven like a ship upon rough seas.
    No one face likes me best, all faces move,
    A hundred reasons make me ever love.                              10
    If any eye me with a modest look,
    I burn,[252] and by that blushful glance am took;
    And she that's coy I like, for being no clown,
    Methinks she would be nimble when she's down.
    Though her sour looks a Sabine's brow resemble,
    I think she'll do, but deeply can dissemble.
    If she be learned, then for her skill I crave her;
    If not, because she's simple I would have her.
    Before Callimachus one prefers me far;
    Seeing she likes my books, why should we jar?                     20
    Another rails at me, and that I write,
    Yet would I lie with her, if that I might:
    Trips she, it likes me well; plods she, what than[253]?
    She would be nimbler lying with a man.
    And when one sweetly sings, then straight I long,
    To quaver on her lips even in her song;
    Or if one touch the lute with art and cunning,
    Who would not love those hands[254] for their swift running?
    And her I like that with a majesty,
    Folds up her arms, and makes low courtesy.                        30
    To[255] leave myself, that am in love with all,
    Some one of these might make the chastest fall.
    If she be tall, she's like an Amazon,
    And therefore fills the bed she lies upon:
    If short, she lies the rounder: to speak[256] troth,
    Both short and long please me, for I love both.
    I[257] think what one undecked would be, being drest;
    Is she attired? then show her graces best.
    A white wench thralls me, so doth golden yellow:
    And nut-brown girls in doing have no fellow.                      40
    If her white neck be shadowed with black hair,
    Why so was Leda's, yet was Leda fair.
    Amber-tress'd[258] is she? then on the morn think I:
    My love alludes to every history:
    A young wench pleaseth, and an old is good,
    This for her looks, that for her womanhood:
    Nay what is she, that any Roman loves,
    But my ambitious ranging mind approves?

FOOTNOTES:

[249] "Mendosos ... mores."

[250] "Heu quam, quae studeas ponere, ferre grave est."

[251] So eds. B, C.--Isham copy and ed. A "And."

[252] This is Dyce's certain correction for the old eds. "blush." (The
originals has "uror.")

[253] Then.

[254] Ed. A "those _nimble_ hands."

[255]

    "Ut taceam de me, qui causa tangor ab omni,
        Illic Hippolytum pone, Priapus erit."

[256] So Isham copy and ed. A.--Eds. B, C "say."

[257] This and the next three lines are omitted in Isham copy and ed. A.

[258] So eds. B, C.--Isham copy and ed. A "yellow trest."




ELEGIA V.[259]

Ad amicam corruptam.


    No love is so dear,--quivered Cupid, fly!--
    That my chief wish should be so oft to die.
    Minding thy fault, with death I wish to revel;
    Alas! a wench is a perpetual evil.
    No intercepted lines thy deeds display,
    No gifts given secretly thy crime bewray.
    O would my proofs as vain might be withstood!
    Ay me, poor soul, why is my cause so good?
    He's happy, that his love dares boldly credit;
    To whom his wench can say, "I never did it."                      10
    He's cruel, and too much his grief doth favour,
    That seeks the conquest by her loose behaviour.
    Poor wretch,[260] I saw when thou didst think I slumbered;
    Not drunk, your faults on the spilt wine I numbered.
    I saw your nodding eyebrows much to speak,
    Even from your cheeks, part of a voice did break.
    Not silent were thine eyes, the board with wine
    Was scribbled, and thy fingers writ a line.
    I knew your speech (what do not lovers see?)
    And words that seemed for certain marks to be.                    20
    Now many guests were gone, the feast being done,
    The youthful sort to divers pastimes run.
    I saw you then unlawful kisses join;
    (Such with my tongue it likes me to purloin);
    None such the sister gives her brother grave,
    But such kind wenches let their lovers have.
    Phoebus gave not Diana such, 'tis thought,
    But Venus often to her Mars such brought.
    "What dost?" I cried; "transport'st thou my delight?
    My lordly hands I'll throw upon my right.                         30
    Such bliss is only common to us two,
    In this sweet good why hath a third to do?"
    This, and what grief enforced me say, I said:
    A scarlet blush her guilty face arrayed;
    Even such as by Aurora hath the sky,
    Or maids that their betrothd husbands spy;
    Such as a rose mixed with a lily breeds,
    Or when the moon travails with charmd steeds.
    Or such as, lest long years should turn the dye,
    Arachne[261] stains Assyrian ivory.                               40
    To these, or some of these, like was her colour:
    By chance her beauty never shind fuller.
    She viewed the earth; the earth to view, beseemed her.
    She lookd sad; sad, comely I esteemed her.
    Even kembd as they were, her locks to rend,
    And scratch her fair soft cheeks I did intend.
    Seeing her face, mine upreared arms descended,
    With her own armour was my wench defended.
    I, that erewhile was fierce, now humbly sue,
    Lest with worse kisses she should me endue.                       50
    She laughed, and kissed so sweetly as might make
    Wrath-kindled Jove away his thunder shake.
    I grieve lest others should such good perceive,
    And wish hereby them all unknown[262] to leave.
    Also much better were they than I tell,
    And ever seemed as some new sweet befell.
    'Tis ill they pleased so much, for in my lips
    Lay her whole tongue hid, mine in hers she dips.
    This grieves me not; no joind kisses spent,
    Bewail I only, though I them lament.                              60
    Nowhere can they be taught but in the bed;
    I know no master of so great hire sped.[263]

FOOTNOTES:

[259] Not in Isham copy or ed. A.

[260] So Dyce for "Poor _wench_" of the old eds.--The original has "Ipse
miser vidi."

[261] "Maeonis Assyrium femina tinxit opus." Dyce remarks that Marlowe
"was induced to give this extraordinary version of the line by
recollecting that in the sixth book of Ovid's _Metamorphoses_ Arachne is
termed 'Maeonis,' while her father is mentioned as a dyer."

[262] A bad mistranslation of "Et volo non ex hac illa fuisse nota."

[263] Far from the original "Nescio quis pretium grande magister habet."




ELEGIA VI.[264]

In mortem psittaci.


    The parrot, from East India to me sent,[265]
    Is dead; all fowls her exequies frequent!
    Go godly[266] birds, striking your breasts, bewail,
    And with rough claws your tender cheeks assail.
    For woful hairs let piece-torn plumes abound,
    For long shrild[267] trumpets let your notes resound.
    Why Philomel dost Tereus' lewdness mourn?
    All wasting years have that complaint now[268] worn.
    Thy tunes let this rare bird's sad funeral borrow;
    Itys[269] a great, but ancient cause of sorrow.                   10
    All you whose pinions in the clear air soar,
    But most, thou friendly turtle-dove, deplore.
    Full concord all your lives was you betwixt,
    And to the end your constant faith stood fixt.
    What Pylades did to Orestes prove,
    Such to the parrot was the turtle-dove.
    But what availed this faith? her rarest hue?
    Or voice that how to change the wild notes knew?
    What helps it thou wert given to please my wench?
    Birds' hapless glory, death thy life doth quench.                 20
    Thou with thy quills might'st make green emeralds dark,
    And pass our scarlet of red saffron's mark.
    No such voice-feigning bird was on the ground,
    Thou spok'st thy words so well with stammering sound.
    Envy hath rapt thee, no fierce wars thou mov'dst;
    Vain-babbling speech, and pleasant peace thou lov'dst.
    Behold how quails among their battles live,
    Which do perchance old age unto them give.
    A little filled thee, and for love of talk,
    Thy mouth to taste of many meats did balk.                        30
    Nuts were thy food, and poppy caused thee sleep,
    Pure water's moisture thirst away did keep.
    The ravenous vulture lives, the puttock[270] hovers
    Around the air, the cadess[271] rain discovers.
    And crow[272] survives arms-bearing Pallas' hate,
    Whose life nine ages scarce bring out of date.
    Dead is that speaking image of man's voice,
    The parrot given me, the far world's[273] best choice.
    The greedy spirits[274] take the best things first,
    Supplying their void places with the worst.                       40
    Thersites did Protesilaus survive;
    And Hector died, his brothers yet alive.
    My wench's vows for thee what should I show,
    Which stormy south winds into sea did blow?
    The seventh day came, none following might'st thou see,
    And the Fate's distaff empty stood to thee:
    Yet words in thy benumbd palate rung;
    "Farewell, Corinna," cried thy dying tongue.
    Elysium hath a wood of holm-trees black,
    Whose earth doth not perpetual green grass lack.                  50
    There good birds rest (if we believe things hidden),
    Whence unclean fowls are said to be forbidden.
    There harmless swans feed all abroad the river;
    There lives the phoenix, one alone bird ever;
    There Juno's bird displays his gorgeous feather,
    And loving doves kiss eagerly together.
    The parrot into wood received with these,
    Turns all the godly[275] birds to what she please.
    A grave her bones hides: on her corps' great grave,
    The little stones these little verses have.                       60
    _This tomb approves I pleased my mistress well
    My mouth in speaking did all birds excell._

FOOTNOTES:

[264] Not in Isham copy or ed. A.

[265] Dyce remarks that Marlowe's copy had "ales mihi missus" for
"imitatrix ales."

[266] So Dyce for "goodly" of the old eds. ("pi volucres").

[267] Shrill.

[268] So Dyce for "not" of the old eds.

[269] So Dyce for "It is as great."

[270] "Miluus."

[271] "Graculus."

[272] Old eds. "crowes."

[273] Old eds. "words."

[274] Marlowe was very weak in Latin prosedy. The original has "manibus
rapiuntur avaris."

[275] Old eds. "goodly" ("_pias_ volueres").




ELEGIA VII.[276]

Amic se purgat, quod ancillam non amet.


    Dost me of new crimes always guilty frame?
    To overcome, so oft to fight I shame.
    If on the marble theatre I look,
    One among many is, to grieve thee, took.
    If some fair wench me secretly behold,
    Thou arguest she doth secret marks unfold.
    If I praise any, thy poor hairs thou tearest;
    If blame, dissembling of my fault thou fearest.
    If I look well, thou think'st thou dost not move,
    If ill, thou say'st I die for others' love.                       10
    Would I were culpable of some offence,
    They that deserve pain, bear't with patience.
    Now rash accusing, and thy vain belief,
    Forbid thine anger to procure my grief.
    Lo, how the miserable great-eared ass,
    Dulled with much beating, slowly forth doth pass!
    Behold Cypassis, wont to dress thy head,
    Is charged to violate her mistress' bed!
    The gods from this sin rid me of suspicion,
    To like a base wench of despised condition.                       20
    With Venus' game who will a servant grace?
    Or any back, made rough with stripes, embrace?
    Add she was diligent thy locks to braid,
    And, for her skill, to thee a grateful maid.
    Should I solicit her that is so just,--
    To take repulse, and cause her show my lust?
    I swear by Venus, and the winged boy's bow,
    Myself unguilty of this crime I know.

FOOTNOTES:

[276] Not in Isham copy or ed. A.




ELEGIA VIII.[277]

Ad Cypassim ancillam Corinn.


    Cypassis, that a thousand ways trim'st hair,
    Worthy to kemb none but a goddess fair,
    Our pleasant scapes show thee no clown to be,
    Apt to thy mistress, but more apt to me.
    Who that our bodies were comprest bewrayed?
    Whence knows Corinna that with thee I played?
    Yet blushed I not, nor used I any saying,
    That might be urged to witness our false playing.
    What if a man with bondwomen offend,
    To prove him foolish did I e'er contend?                          10
    Achilles burnt with face of captive Brisis,
    Great Agamemnon loved his servant Chrysis.[278]
    Greater than these myself I not esteem:
    What gracd kings, in me no shame I deem.
    But when on thee her angry eyes did rush,
    In both thy[279] cheeks she did perceive thee[280] blush.
    But being present,[281] might that work the best,
    By Venus deity how did I protest!
    Thou goddess dost command a warm south blast,
    My self oaths in Carpathian seas to cast.                         20
    For which good turn my sweet reward repay,
    Let me lie with thee, brown Cypass, to-day.
    Ungrate, why feign'st new fears, and dost refuse?
    Well may'st thou one thing for thy mistress use.[282]
    If thou deniest, fool, I'll our deeds express,
    And as a traitor mine own faults confess;
    Telling thy mistress where I was with thee,
    How oft, and by what means, we did agree.

FOOTNOTES:

[277] Not in Isham copy or ed. A.

[278] "Serva Phoebas" (_i.e._ Cassandra).

[279] Old eds. "my."

[280] So ed. B.--Ed. C "the."

[281]

    "At quanto, si forte refers, _prsentior_ ipse,
      Per Veneris feci numina magna fidem."

[282] The original has "Unum est e dominis emeruisse satis."




ELEGIA IX.[283]

Ad Cupidinem.


    O Cupid, that dost never cease my smart!
    O boy, that liest so slothful in my heart!
    Why me that always was the soldier found,
    Dost harm, and in thy[284] tents why dost me wound?
    Why burns thy brand, why strikes thy bow thy friends?
    More glory by thy vanquished foes ascends.
    Did not Pelides whom his spear did grieve,
    Being required, with speedy help relieve?
    Hunters leave taken beasts, pursue the chase,
    And than things found do ever further pace.                       10
    We people wholly given thee, feel thine-arms,
    Thy dull hand stays thy striving enemies' harms.
    Dost joy to have thy hookd arrows shaked
    In naked bones? love hath my bones left naked.
    So many men and maidens without love,
    Hence with great laud thou may'st a triumph move.
    Rome, if her strength the huge world had not filled,
    With strawy cabins now her courts should build.
    The weary soldier hath the conquered fields,
    His sword, laid by, safe, tho' rude places yields;[285]           20
    The dock inharbours ships drawn from the floods,
    Horse freed from service range abroad the woods.
    And time it was for me to live in quiet,
    That have so oft served pretty wenches' diet.
    Yet should I curse a God, if he but said,
    "Live without love," so sweet ill is a maid.
    For when my loathing it of heat deprives me,
    I know not whither my mind's whirlwind drives me.
    Even as a headstrong courser bears away
    His rider, vainly striving him to stay;                           30
    Or as a sudden gale thrusts into sea
    The haven-touching bark, now near the lea;
    So wavering Cupid brings me back amain,
    And purple Love resumes his darts again.
    Strike, boy, I offer thee my naked breast,
    Here thou hast strength, here thy right hand doth rest.
    Here of themselves thy shafts come, as if shot;
    Better than I their quiver knows them not:
    Hapless is he that all the night lies quiet.
    And slumbering, thinks himself much blessd by it.                40
    Fool, what is sleep but image of cold death,
    Long shalt thou rest when Fates expire thy breath.
    But me let crafty damsel's words deceive,
    Great joys by hope I inly shall conceive.
    Now let her flatter me, now chide me hard,
    Let me[286] enjoy her oft, oft be debarred.
    Cupid, by thee, Mars in great doubt doth trample,
    And thy stepfather fights by thy example.
    Light art thou, and more windy than thy wings;
    Joys with uncertain faith thou tak'st and brings:                 50
    Yet Love, if thou with thy fair mother hear,
    Within my breast no desert empire bear;
    Subdue the wandering wenches to thy reign,
    So of both people shalt thou homage gain.

FOOTNOTES:

[283] Not in Isham copy or ed. A.

[284] So ed. B.--Ed. C "my."

[285] In some strange fashion Marlowe has mistaken the substantive
"rudis" (the staff received by the gladiator on his discharge) with the
adjective "rudis" (rude). The original has "Tutaque deposito poscitur
ense rudis."

[286] Old eds. "Let her enjoy me;" but the original has "Saepe fruar
domina."




ELEGIA X.

Ad Grcinum quod eodem tempore duas amet.


    Grcinus (well I wot) thou told'st me once,
    I could not be in love with two at once;
    By thee deceived, by thee surprised am I,
    For now I love two women equally:
    Both are well favoured, both rich in array,
    Which is the loveliest[287] it is hard to say:
    This seems the fairest, so doth that to me;
    And[288] this doth please me most, and so doth she;
    Even as a boat tossed by contrry wind,
    So with this love and that wavers my mind.                        10
    Venus, why doublest thou my endless smart?
    Was not one wench enough to grieve my heart?
    Why add'st thou stars to heaven, leaves to green woods,
    And to the deep[289] vast sea fresh water-floods?
    Yet this is better far than lie alone:
    Let such as be mine enemies have none;
    Yea, let my foes sleep in an empty bed,
    And in the midst their bodies largely spread:
    But may soft[290] love rouse up my drowsy eyes,
    And from my mistress' bosom let me rise!                          20
    Let one wench cloy me with sweet love's delight,
    If one can do't; if not, two every night.
    Though I am slender, I have store of pith,
    Nor want I strength, but weight, to press her with:
    Pleasure adds fuel to my lustful fire,
    I pay them home with that they most desire:
    Oft have I spent the night in wantonness,
    And in the morn been lively ne'ertheless,
    He's happy who Love's mutual skirmish slays;
    And to the gods for that death Ovid prays.                        30
    Let soldiers[291] chase their enemies amain,
    And with their blood eternal honour gain,
    Let merchants seek wealth and[292] with perjured lips,
    Being wrecked, carouse the sea tired by their ships;
    But when I die, would I might droop with doing,
    And in the midst thereof, set[293] my soul going,
    That at my funerals some may weeping cry,
    "Even as he led his life, so did he die."

FOOTNOTES:

[287] "Artibus in dubio est haec sit an illa prior." Dyce suggests that
Marlowe read "Artubus."

[288] Not in Isham copy or ed. A.

[289] Eds. B, C, "vast deep sea."

[290] The original has "saevus" (for which Marlowe seems to have read
"suavis").

[291] Isham copy and ed. A "souldiour ... his," and in the next line
"his blood."

[292] So Cunningham for--

    "Let merchants seek wealth with perjured lips
    _And_ being wrecked," &c.

[293] So Isham copy and eds. B, C--Ed. A "let."




ELEGIA XI.[294]

Ad amicam navigantem.


    The lofty pine, from high Mount Pelion raught,[295]
    Ill ways by rough seas wondering waves first taught;
    Which rashly 'twixt the sharp rocks in the deep,
    Carried the famous golden-fleecd sheep.
    O would that no oars might in seas have sunk!
    The Argo[296] wrecked had deadly waters drunk.
    Lo, country gods and know[n] bed to forsake
    Corinna means, and dangerous ways to take.
    For thee the East and West winds make me pale,
    With icy Boreas, and the Southern gale.                           10
    Thou shalt admire no woods or cities there,
    The unjust seas all bluish do appear.
    The ocean hath no painted stones or shells,
    The sucking[297] shore with their abundance swells.
    Maids on the shore, with marble-white feet tread,
    So far 'tis safe; but to go farther, dread.
    Let others tell how winds fierce battles wage,
    How Scylla's and Charybdis' waters rage;
    And with what rock[s] the feared Ceraunia threat;
    In what gulf either Syrtes have their seat.                       20
    Let others tell this, and what each one speaks
    Believe; no tempest the believer wreaks.[298]
    Too late you look back, when with anchors weighed,
    The crookd bark hath her swift sails displayed.
    The careful shipman now fears angry gusts,
    And with the waters sees death near him thrusts.
    But if that Triton toss the troubled flood,
    In all thy face will be no crimson blood.
    Then wilt thou Leda's noble twin-stars pray,
    And, he is happy whom the earth holds, say.                       30
    It is more safe to sleep, to read a book,
    The Thracian harp with cunning to have strook.
    But if my words with wingd storm hence slip,
    Yet, Galatea, favour thou her ship.
    The loss of such a wench much blame will gather,
    Both to the sea-nymphs and the sea-nymphs' father.
    Go, minding to return with prosperous wind,
    Whose blast may hither strongly be inclined.
    Let Nereus bend the waves unto this shore,
    Hither the winds blow, here the spring-tide roar.                 40
    Request mild Zephyr's help for thy avail,
    And with thy hand assist thy swelling sail.
    I from the shore thy known ship first will see,
    And say it brings her that preserveth me.
    I'll clip[299] and kiss thee with all contentation;
    For thy return shall fall the vowed oblation;
    And in the form of beds we'll strew soft sand;
    Each little hill shall for a table stand:
    There, wine being filled, thou many things shalt tell,
    How, almost wrecked, thy ship in main seas fell.                  50
    And hasting to me, neither darksome night,
    Nor violent south-winds did thee aught affright,
    I'll think all true, though it be feignd matter!
    Mine own desires why should myself not flatter?
    Let the bright day-star cause in heaven this day be,
    To bring that happy time so soon as may be.

FOOTNOTES:

[294] Not in Isham copy or ed. A.

[295] "Csa."

[296] Old eds. "Argos."

[297] "Bibuli litoris illa mora est."

[298] Dyce was doubtless right in supposing "wreaks" to be used _metri
causa_ for "wrecks." Cunningham wanted to give the meaning "recks;" but
that meaning does not suit the context. The original has "credenti nulla
procella nocet."

[299] "Excipiamque humeris."




ELEGIA XII.[300]

Exultat, quod amica potitus sit.


    About my temples go, triumphant bays!
    Conquered Corinna in my bosom lays.
    She whom her husband, guard, and gate, as foes,
    Lest art should win her, firmly did enclose:
    That victory doth chiefly triumph merit,
    Which without bloodshed doth the prey inherit.
    No little ditchd towns, no lowly walls,
    But to my share a captive damsel falls.
    When Troy by ten years' battle tumbled down,
    With the Atrides many gained renown:                              10
    But I no partner of my glory brook,
    Nor can another say his help I took.
    I, guide and soldier, won the field and wear her,
    I was both horseman, footman, standard-bearer.
    Nor in my act hath fortune mingled chance:
    O care-got[301] triumph hitherwards advance!
    Nor is my war's cause new; but for a queen,
    Europe and Asia in firm peace had been;
    The Lapiths and the Centaurs, for a woman,
    To cruel arms their drunken selves did summon;                    20
    A woman forced the Trojans new to enter
    Wars, just Latinus, in thy kingdom's centre;
    A woman against late-built Rome did send
    The Sabine fathers, who sharp wars intend.
    I saw how bulls for a white heifer strive,
    She looking on them did more courage give.
    And me with many, but me[302] without murther,
    Cupid commands to move his ensigns further.

FOOTNOTES:

[300] Not in Isham copy or ed. A.

[301] "Cura parte triumphe mea."

[302] Ed. B "but yet me."--Ed. C "but yet without."




ELEGIA XIII.[303]

Ad Isidem, ut parientem Corinnam servet.


    While rashly her womb's burden she casts out,
    Weary Corinna hath her life in doubt.
    She, secretly from[304] me, such harm attempted,
    Angry I was, but fear my wrath exempted.
    But she conceived of me; or I am sure
    I oft have done what might as much procure.
    Thou that frequent'st Canopus' pleasant fields,
    Memphis, and Pharos that sweet date-trees yields,
    And where swift Nile in his large channel skipping,[305]
    By seven huge mouths into the sea is slipping.                    10
    By feared Anubis' visage I thee pray,--
    So in thy temples shall Osiris stay,
    And the dull snake about thy offerings creep,
    And in thy pomp horned Apis with thee keep,--
    Turn thy looks hither, and in one spare twain:
    Thou givest my mistress life, she mine again.
    She oft hath served thee upon certain days,
    Where the French[306] rout engirt themselves with bays.
    On labouring women thou dost pity take,
    Whose bodies with their heavy burdens ache;                       20
    My wench, Lucina, I entreat thee favour;
    Worthy she is, thou should'st in mercy save her.
    In white, with incense, I'll thine altars greet,
    Myself will bring vowed gifts before thy feet,
    Subscribing _Naso with Corinna saved_:
    Do but deserve gifts with this title graved.
    But, if in so great fear I may advise thee,
    To have this skirmish fought let it suffice thee.

FOOTNOTES:

[303] Not in Isham copy or ed. A.

[304] Old eds. "with," which must be a printer's error. (The original
has "clam me.")

[305] Old eds. "slipping."

[306] "Gallica turma" (_i.e._ the company of _Galli_, the priests of
Isis).




ELEGIA XIV.[307]

In amicam, quod abortivum ipsa fecerit.


    What helps it woman to be free from war,
    Nor, being armed, fierce troops to follow far,
    If without battle self-wrought wounds annoy them.
    And their own privy-weaponed hands destroy them
    Who unborn infants first to slay invented,
    Deserved thereby with death to be tormented.
    Because thy belly should rough wrinkles lack,
    Wilt thou thy womb-inclosd offspring wrack?
    Had ancient mothers this vile custom cherished,
    All human kind by their default[308] had perished;                10
    Or[309] stones, our stock's original should be hurled,
    Again, by some, in this unpeopled world.
    Who should have Priam's wealthy substance won,
    If watery Thetis had her child fordone?
    In swelling womb her twins had Ilia killed,
    He had not been that conquering Rome bid build.
    Had Venus spoiled her belly's Trojan fruit,
    The earth of Csars had been destitute.
    Thou also that wert born fair, had'st decayed,
    If such a work thy mother had assayed.                            20
    Myself, that better die with loving may,
    Had seen, my mother killing me, no[310] day.
    Why tak'st increasing grapes from vinetrees full?
    With cruel hand why dost green apples pull?
    Fruits ripe will fall; let springing things increase;
    Life is no light price of a small surcease.[311]
    Why with hid irons are your bowels torn?
    And why dire poison give you babes unborn?
    At Colchis, stained with children's blood, men rail,
    And mother-murdered Itys they[312] bewail.                        30
    Both unkind parents; but, for causes sad,
    Their wedlocks' pledges[313] venged their husbands bad.
    What Tereus, what Ison you provokes,
    To plague your bodies with such harmful strokes?
    Armenian tigers never did so ill,
    Nor dares the lioness her young whelps kill.
    But tender damsels do it, though with pain;
    Oft dies she that her paunch-wrapt[314] child hath slain:
    She dies, and with loose hairs to grave is sent,
    And whoe'er see her, worthily[315] lament.                        40
    But in the air let these words come to naught,
    And my presages of no weight be thought.
    Forgive her, gracious gods, this one delict,
    And on the next fault punishment inflict.

FOOTNOTES:

[307] Not in Isham copy or ed. A.

[308] "Vitio."

[309] Old eds. "On."

[310] Old eds. "to-day."

[311] "Est pretium parv non leve vita mor."

[312] Dyce's suggestion for "thee" of the old eds. The original has
"Aque sua caesum matre queruntur Ityn."

[313]

        "Sed tristibus utraque causis
    Jactura socii sanguinis ulta virum."

[314] An inelegant translation of "Saepe suos uteros quae necat ipse
perit."

[315] Marlowe has given a meaning the very opposite of the original--"Et
clamant 'Merito' qui modo cumque vident."




ELEGIA XV.[316]

Ad annulum, quem dono amic dedit.


    Thou ring that shalt my fair girl's finger bind,
    Wherein is seen the giver's loving mind:
    Be welcome to her, gladly let her take thee,
    And, her small joints encircling, round hoop make thee.
    Fit her so well, as she is fit for me,
    And of just compass for her knuckles be.
    Blest ring, thou in my mistress' hand shall lie,
    Myself, poor wretch, mine own gifts now envy.
    O would that suddenly into my gift,
    I could myself by secret magic shift!                             10
    Then would I wish thee touch my mistress' pap,
    And hide thy left hand underneath her lap,
    I would get off, though strait and sticking fast,
    And in her bosom strangely fall at last.
    Then I, that I may seal her privy leaves,
    Lest to the wax the hold-fast dry gem cleaves,
    Would first my beauteous wench's moist lips touch;
    Only I'll sign naught that may grieve me much.
    I would not out, might I in one place hit:
    But in less compass her small fingers knit.                       20
    My life! that I will shame thee never fear,
    Or be[317] a load thou should'st refuse to bear.
    Wear me, when warmest showers thy members wash,
    And through the gem let thy lost waters pash,
    But seeing thee, I think my thing will swell,
    And even the ring perform a man's part well.
    Vain things why wish I? go, small gift, from hand;
    Let her my faith, with thee given, understand.

FOOTNOTES:

[316] Not in Isham copy or ed. A.

[317] Old eds. "by."




ELEGIA XVI.[318]

Ad amicam, ut ad rura sua veniat.


    Sulmo, Peligny's third part, me contains,
    A small, but wholesome soil with watery veins,
    Although the sun to rive[319] the earth incline,
    And the Icarian froward dog-star shine;
    Pelignian fields with liquid rivers flow,
    And on the soft ground fertile green grass grow;
    With corn the earth abounds, with vines much more,
    And some few pastures Pallas' olives bore;
    And by the rising herbs, where clear springs slide,
    A grassy turf the moistened earth doth hide.                      10
    But absent is my fire; lies I'll tell none,
    My heat is here, what moves my heat is gone.
    Pollux and Castor, might I stand betwixt,
    In heaven without thee would I not be fixt.
    Upon the cold earth pensive let them lay,
    That mean to travel some long irksome way.
    Or else will maidens young men's mates to go,
    If they determine to persver so.
    Then on the rough Alps should I tread aloft,
    My hard way with my mistress would seem soft.                     20
    With her I durst the Libyan Syrts break through,
    And raging seas in boisterous south-winds plough.
    No barking dogs, that Scylla's entrails bear,
    Nor thy gulfs, crook'd Malea, would I fear.
    No flowing waves with drownd ships forth-poured
    By cloyed Charybdis, and again devoured.
    But if stern Neptune's windy power prevail,
    And waters' force force helping Gods to fail,
    With thy white arms upon my shoulders seize;
    So sweet a burden I will bear with ease.                          30
    The youth oft swimming to his Hero kind,
    Had then swum over, but the way was blind.
    But without thee, although vine-planted ground
    Contains me; though the streams the[320] fields surround;
    Though hinds in brooks the running waters bring,
    And cool gales shake the tall trees' leafy spring;
    Healthful Peligny, I esteem naught worth,
    Nor do I like the country of my birth.
    Scythia, Cilicia, Britain are as good,
    And rocks dyed crimson with Prometheus' blood.                    40
    Elms love the vines; the vines with elms abide,
    Why doth my mistress from me oft divide?
    Thou swear'dst,[321] division should not twixt us rise,
    By me, and by my stars, thy radiant eyes;
    Maids' words more vain and light than falling leaves,
    Which, as it seems, hence wind and sea bereaves.
    If any godly care of me thou hast,
    Add deeds unto thy promises at last.
    And with swift nags drawing thy little coach
    (Their reins let loose), right soon my house approach.            50
    But when she comes, you[322] swelling mounts, sink down,
    And falling valleys be the smooth ways' crown.[323]

FOOTNOTES:

[318] Not in Isham copy or ed. A.

[319] "Findat."

[320] Ed. B "in fields."--Ed. C "in field."

[321] Old eds. "swearest."

[322] Old eds. "your."

[323] "Et faciles curvis vallibus este vi."




ELEGIA XVII.[324]

Quod Corinn soli sit serviturus.


    To serve a wench if any think it shame,
    He being judge, I am convinced of blame.
    Let me be slandered, while my fire she hides,
    That Paphos, and[325] flood-beat Cythera guides.
    Would I had been my mistress' gentle prey,
    Since some fair one I should of force obey.
    Beauty gives heart; Corinna's looks excell;
    Ay me, why is it known to her so well?
    But by her glass disdainful pride she learns,
    Nor she herself, but first trimmed up, discerns.                  10
    Not though thy face in all things make thee reign,
    (O face, most cunning mine eyes to detain!)
    Thou ought'st therefore to scorn me for thy mate,
    Small things with greater may be copulate.
    Love-snared Calypso is supposed to pray
    A mortal nymph's[326] refusing lord to stay.
    Who doubts, with Peleus Thetis did consort,
    Egeria with just Numa had good sport.
    Venus with Vulcan, though, smith's tools laid by,
    With his stump foot he halts ill-favouredly.                      20
    This kind of verse is not alike; yet fit,
    With shorter numbers the heroic sit.
    And thou, my light, accept me howsoever;
    Lay in the mid bed, there be my lawgiver.
    My stay no crime, my flight no joy shall breed,
    Nor of our love, to be ashamed we need.
    For great revenues I good verses have,
    And many by me to get glory crave.
    I know a wench reports herself Corinne;
    What would not she give that fair name to win?                    30
    But sundry floods in one bank never go,
    Eurotas cold, and poplar-bearing Po;
    Nor in my books shall one but thou be writ,
    Thou dost alone give matter to my wit.

FOOTNOTES:

[324] Not in Isham copy or ed. A.

[325] Old eds. "and the."

[326] Marlowe reads "nymph" for "nymphe."




ELEGIA XVIII.[327]

Ad Macrum, quod de amoribus scribat.


    To tragic verse while thou Achilles train'st,
    And new sworn soldiers' maiden arms retain'st,
    We, Macer, sit in Venus' slothful shade,
    And tender love hath great things hateful made.
    Often at length, my wench depart I bid,
    She in my lap sits still as erst she did.
    I said, "It irks me:" half to weeping framed,
    "Ay me!" she cries, "to love why art ashamed?"
    Then wreathes about my neck her winding arms,
    And thousand kisses gives, that work my harms:                    10
    I yield, and back my wit from battles bring,
    Domestic acts, and mine own wars to sing.
    Yet tragedies, and sceptres fill'd my lines,
    But though I apt were for such high designs,
    Love laughd at my cloak, and buskins painted,
    And rule, so soon with private hands acquainted.
    My mistress' deity also drew me fro it,
    And love triumpheth o'er his buskined poet.
    What lawful is, or we profess love's art:
    (Alas, my precepts turn myself to smart!)                         20
    We write, or what Penelope sends Ulysses,
    Or Phillis' tears that her Demophoon misses.
    What thankless Jason, Macareus, and Paris,
    Phedra, and Hippolyte may read, my care is.
    And what poor Dido, with her drawn sword sharp,
    Doth say, with her that loved the Aonian harp.
    As[328] soon as from strange lands Sabinus came,
    And writings did from divers places frame,
    White-cheeked Penelope knew Ulysses' sign,
    The step-dame read Hippolytus' lustless line.                     30
    neas to Elisa answer gives,
    And Phillis hath to read, if now she lives.
    Jason's sad letter doth Hypsipyle greet;
    Sappho her vowed harp lays at Phoebus' feet.
    Nor of thee, Macer, that resound'st forth arms,
    Is golden love hid in Mars' mid alarms.
    There Paris is, and Helen's crimes record,
    With Laodamia, mate to her dead lord,
    Unless I err to these thou more incline,
    Than wars, and from thy tents wilt come to mine.                  40

FOOTNOTES:

[327] Not in Isham copy or ed. A.

[328] The original has "Quam cito de toto rediit meus orbe Sabinus," &c.




ELEGIA XIX.[329]

Ad rivalem cui uxor cur non erat.


    Fool, if to keep thy wife thou hast no need,
    Keep her from me, my more desire to breed;
    We scorn things lawful; stolen sweets we affect;
    Cruel is he that loves whom none protect.
    Let us, both lovers, hope and fear alike,
    And may repulse place for our wishes strike.[330]
    What should I do with fortune that ne'er fails me?
    Nothing I love that at all times avails me.
    Wily Corinna saw this blemish in me,
    And craftily knows by what means to win me.                       10
    Ah, often, that her hale[331] head ached, she lying,
    Willed me, whose slow feet sought delay, be flying!
    Ah, oft, how much she might, she feigned offence;
    And, doing wrong, made show of innocence.
    So, having vexed, she nourished my warm fire,
    And was again most apt to my desire.
    To please me, what fair terms and sweet words has she!
    Great gods! what kisses, and how many ga'[332] she!
    Thou also that late took'st mine eyes away,
    Oft cozen[333] me, oft, being wooed, say nay;                     20
    And on thy threshold let me lie dispread,
    Suff'ring much cold by hoary night's frost bred.
    So shall my love continue many years;
    This doth delight me, this my courage cheers.
    Fat love, and too much fulsome, me annoys,
    Even as sweet meat a glutted stomach cloys.
    In brazen tower had not Dane dwelt,
    A mother's joy by Jove she had not felt.
    While Juno I keeps, when horns she wore,
    Jove liked her better than he did before.                         30
    Who covets lawful things takes leaves from woods,
    And drinks stolen waters in surrounding floods.
    Her lover let her mock that long will reign:
    Ay me, let not my warnings cause my pain!
    Whatever haps, by sufferance harm is done,
    What flies I follow, what follows me I shun.
    But thou, of thy fair damsel too secure,
    Begin to shut thy house at evening sure.
    Search at the door who knocks oft in the dark,
    In night's deep silence why the ban-dogs[334] bark.               40
    Whither[335] the subtle maid lines[336] brings and carries,
    Why she alone in empty bed oft tarries.
    Let this care sometimes bite thee to the quick,
    That to deceits it may me forward prick.
    To steal sands from the shore he loves a-life[337]
    That can affect[338] a foolish wittol's wife.
    Now I forewarn, unless to keep her stronger
    Thou dost begin, she shall be mine no longer.
    Long have I borne much, hoping time would beat thee
    To guard her well, that well I might entreat thee.[339]           50
    Thou suffer'st what no husband can endure,
    But of my love it will an end procure.
    Shall I, poor soul, be never interdicted?
    Nor never with night's sharp revenge afflicted.
    In sleeping shall I fearless draw my breath?
    Wilt nothing do, why I should wish thy death?
    Can I but loathe a husband grown a bawd?
    By thy default thou dost our joys defraud.
    Some other seek that may in patience strive with thee,
    To pleasure me, forbid me to corrive with thee.[340]              60

FOOTNOTES:

[329] Not in Isham copy or ed. A.

[330] "Et faciat voto rara repulsa locum."

[331] Old eds, "haole"--The construction is not plain without a
reference to the original:--

    "Ah, quotiens sani capitis mentita dolores,
      Cunctantem tardo jussit abire pede."

[332] So Dyce for "gave" of the old eds.

[333] The reading of the original is "Saepe time insidias."

[334] Dogs tied up on account of their fierceness.

[335] Old eds. "Whether" (a common form of "whither").

[336] "Tabellas."

[337] As dearly as life.

[338] Old eds. "effect."

[339]

    "Multa diuque tuli; speravi saepe futurum
      Cum bene servasses ut bene verba darem."

[340] "Me tibi rivalem si juvat esse, veta."




P. OVIDII MASONIS AMORUM.

LIBER TERTIUS.




ELEGIA I.[341]

Deliberatio poet, utrum elegos pergat scribere an potius tragoedias.


    An old wood stands, uncut of long years' space,
    'Tis credible some godhead[342] haunts the place.
    In midst thereof a stone-paved sacred spring,
    Where round about small birds most sweetly sing.
    Here while I walk, hid close in shady grove,
    To find what work my muse might move, I strove,
    Elegia came with hairs perfumd sweet,
    And one, I think, was longer, of her feet:
    A decent form, thin robe, a lover's look,
    By her foot's blemish greater grace she took.                     10
    Then with huge steps came violent Tragedy,
    Stern was her front, her cloak[343] on ground did lie.
    Her left hand held abroad a regal sceptre,
    The Lydian buskin [in] fit paces kept her.
    And first she[344] said, "When will thy love be spent,
    O poet careless of thy argument?
    Wine-bibbing banquets tell thy naughtiness,
    Each cross-way's corner doth as much express.
    Oft some points at the prophet passing by,
    And, 'This is he whom fierce love burns,' they cry.               20
    A laughing-stock thou art to all the city;
    While without shame thou sing'st thy lewdness' ditty.
    'Tis time to move great things in lofty style,
    Long hast thou loitered; greater works compile.
    The subject hides thy wit; men's acts resound;
    This thou wilt say to be a worthy ground.
    Thy muse hath played what may mild girls content,
    And by those numbers is thy first youth spent.
    Now give the Roman Tragedy a name,
    To fill my laws thy wanton spirit frame."                         30
    This said, she moved her buskins gaily varnished,
    And seven times shook her head with thick locks garnished.
    The other smiled (I wot), with wanton eyes:
    Err I, or myrtle in her right hand lies?
    "With lofty words stout Tragedy," she said,
    "Why tread'st me down? art thou aye gravely play'd?
    Thou deign'st unequal lines should thee rehearse;
    Thou fight'st against me using mine own verse.
    Thy lofty style with mine I not compare,
    Small doors unfitting for large houses are.                       40
    Light am I, and with me, my care, light Love;
    Not stronger am I, than the thing I move.
    Venus without me should be rustical:
    This goddess' company doth to me befal.
    What gate thy stately words cannot unlock,
    My flattering speeches soon wide open knock.
    And I deserve more than thou canst in verity,
    By suffering much not borne by thy severity.
    By me Corinna learns, cozening her guard,
    To get the door with little noise unbarred;                       50
    And slipped from bed, clothed in a loose nightgown,
    To move her feet unheard in setting[345] down.
    Ah, how oft on hard doors hung I engraved,
    From no man's reading fearing to be saved!
    But, till the keeper[346] went forth, I forget not,
    The maid to hide me in her bosom let not.
    What gift with me was on her birthday sent,
    But cruelly by her was drowned and rent.
    First of thy mind the happy seeds I knew;[347]
    Thou hast my gift, which she would from thee sue."                60
    She left;[348] I said, "You both I must beseech,
    To empty air[349] may go my fearful speech.
    With sceptres and high buskins th' one would dress me,
    So through the world should bright renown express me.
    The other gives my love a conquering name;
    Come, therefore, and to long verse shorter frame.
    Grant, Tragedy, thy poet time's least tittle:
    Thy labour ever lasts; she asks but little."
    She gave me leave; soft loves, in time make haste;
    Some greater work will urge me on at last.                        70

FOOTNOTES:

[341] Not in Isham copy or ed. A.

[342] Old eds. "good head."

[343] So Dyce--Old eds. "looke." ("Palla jacebat humi.")

[344] Old eds. "he."

[345] Old eds. "sitting." ("Atque impercussos nocte movere pedes.")

[346] Ed. B "keepes;" ed. C "keepers." This line and the next are a
translation of:--

    "Quin ego me memini, dum custos saevus abiret,
        Ancillae missam delituisse sinu."

[347] The original has

    "Prima tuae _movi_ felicia semina mentis."

(Marlowe's copy read "novi.")

[348] "Desierat."

[349] "In vacuas _auras_." (The true reading is "aures.")




ELEGIA II.[350]

Ad amicam cursum equorum spectantem.

    I sit not here the noble horse to see;
    Yet whom thou favour'st, pray may conqueror be.
    To sit and talk with thee I hither came,
    That thou may'st know with love thou mak'st me flame.
    Thou view'st the course; I thee: let either heed
    What please them, and their eyes let either feed.
    What horse-driver thou favour'st most is best,
    Because on him thy care doth hap to rest.
    Such chance let me have: I would bravely run,
    On swift steeds mounted till the race were done.                  10
    Now would I slack the reins, now lash their hide,
    With wheels bent inward now the ring-turn ride,
    In running if I see thee, I shall stay,
    And from my hands the reins will slip away.
    Ah, Pelops from his coach was almost felled,
    Hippodamia's looks while he beheld!
    Yet he attained, by her support, to have her:
    Let us all conquer by our mistress' favour.
    In vain, why fly'st back? force conjoins us now:
    The place's laws this benefit allow.                              20
    But spare my wench, thou at her right hand seated;
    By thy sides touching ill she is entreated.[351]
    And sit thou rounder,[352] that behind us see;
    For shame press not her back with thy hard knee.
    But on the ground thy clothes too loosely lie:
    Gather them up, or lift them, lo, will I.
    Envious[353] garments, so good legs to hide!
    The more thou look'st, the more the gown's enved.
    Swift Atalanta's flying legs, like these,
    Wish in his hands grasped did Hippomenes.                         30
    Coat-tucked Diana's legs are painted like them,
    When strong wild beasts, she, stronger, hunts to strike them.
    Ere these were seen, I burnt: what will these do?
    Flames into flame, floods thou pour'st seas into,
    By these I judge; delight me may the rest,
    Which lie hid, under her thin veil supprest.
    Yet in the meantime wilt small winds bestow,
    That from thy fan, moved by my hand, may blow?
    Or is my heat of mind, not of the sky?
    Is't women's love my captive breast doth fry?                     40
    While thus I speak, black dust her white robes ray;[354]
    Foul dust, from her fair body go away!
    Now comes the pomp; themselves let all men cheer;[355]
    The shout is nigh; the golden pomp comes here.
    First, Victory is brought with large spread wing:
    Goddess, come here; make my love conquering.
    Applaud you Neptune, that dare trust his wave,
    The sea I use not: me my earth must have.
    Soldier applaud thy Mars, no wars we move,
    Peace pleaseth me, and in mid peace is love.                      50
    With augurs Phoebus, Phoebe with hunters stands.
    To thee Minerva turn the craftsmen's hands.
    Ceres and Bacchus countrymen adore,
    Champions please[356] Pollux, Castor loves horsemen more.
    Thee, gentle Venus, and the boy that flies,
    We praise: great goddess aid my enterprise.
    Let my new mistress grant to be beloved;
    She becked, and prosperous signs gave as she moved.
    What Venus promised, promise thou we pray
    Greater than her, by her leave, thou'rt, I'll say.                60
    The gods, and their rich pomp witness with me,
    For evermore thou shalt my mistress be.
    Thy legs hang down, thou may'st, if that be best,
    Awhile[357] thy tiptoes on the footstool[358] rest.
    Now greatest spectacles the Prtor sends,
    Four chariot-horses from the lists' even ends.
    I see whom thou affect'st: he shall subdue;
    The horses seem as thy[359] desire they knew.
    Alas, he runs too far about the ring;
    What dost? thy waggon in less compass bring.                      70
    What dost, unhappy? her good wishes fade:
    Let with strong hand the rein to bend be made.
    One slow we favour, Romans, him revoke:
    And each give signs by casting up his cloak.
    They call him back; lest their gowns toss thy hair,
    To hide thee in my bosom straight repair.
    But now again the barriers open lie,
    And forth the gay troops on swift horses fly.
    At least now conquer, and outrun the rest:
    My mistress' wish confirm with my request.                        80
    My mistress hath her wish; my wish remain:
    He holds the palm: my palm is yet to gain.
    She smiled, and with quick eyes behight[360] some grace:
    Pay it not here, but in another place.

FOOTNOTES:

[350] Not in Isham copy or ed. A.

[351] "Contactu lateris laeditur ista tui."

[352] "Tua contraha crura."

[353]

    "Invida vestis eras quod tam bona crura tegebas!
        Quoque magis spectes ... invida vestis eras."

[354] Defile.

[355] A strange rendering of "linguis animisque favete."

[356] Ed. B "pleace;" ed. C "place."

[357] Old eds. "Or while."

[358] "Cancellis" (_i.e._ the rails).

[359] Old eds. "they."

[360] "Promisit."




ELEGIA III.[361]

De amica qu perjuraverat.


    What, are there gods? herself she hath forswore,
    And yet remains the face she had before.
    How long her locks were ere her oath she took,
    So long they be since she her faith forsook.
    Fair white with rose-red was before commixt;
    Now shine her looks pure white and red betwixt.
    Her foot was small: her foot's form is most fit:
    Comely tall was she, comely tall she's yet.
    Sharp eyes she had: radiant like stars they be,
    By which she, perjured oft, hath lied to[362] me.                 10
    In sooth, th' eternal powers grant maids society
    Falsely to swear; their beauty hath some deity.
    By her eyes, I remember, late she swore,
    And by mine eyes, and mine were paind sore.
    Say gods: if she unpunished you deceive,
    For other faults why do I loss receive.
    But did you not so envy[363] Cepheus' daughter,
    For her ill-beauteous mother judged to slaughter.
    'Tis not enough, she shakes your record off,
    And, unrevenged, mocked gods with me doth scoff.                  20
    But by my pain to purge her perjuries,
    Cozened, I am the cozener's sacrifice.
    God is a name, no substance, feared in vain,
    And doth the world in fond belief detain.
    Or if there be a God, he loves fine wenches,
    And all things too much in their sole power drenches.
    Mars girts his deadly sword on for my harm;
    Pallas' lance strikes me with unconquered arm;
    At me Apollo bends his pliant bow;
    At me Jove's right hand lightning hath to throw.                  30
    The wrongd gods dread fair ones to offend,
    And fear those, that to fear them least intend.
    Who now will care the altars to perfume?
    Tut, men should not their courage so consume.
    Jove throws down woods and castles with his fire,
    But bids his darts from perjured girls retire.
    Poor Semele among so many burned,
    Her own request to her own torment turned.
    But when her lover came, had she drawn back,
    The father's thigh should unborn Bacchus lack.                    40
    Why grieve I? and of heaven reproaches pen?
    The gods have eyes, and breasts as well as men.
    Were I a god, I should give women leave,
    With lying lips my godhead to deceive.
    Myself would swear the wenches true did swear,
    And I would be none of the gods severe.
    But yet their gift more moderately use,
    Or in mine eyes, good wench, no pain transfuse.

FOOTNOTES:

[361] Not in Isham copy or ed. A.

[362] Old eds. "by."

[363]

    "At non invidi vobis Cephia virgo est,
            Pro male formosa jussa parente mori?"

("Invidi" here means "discredit, odium.")




ELEGIA IV.[364]

Ad virum servantem conjugem.


    Rude man, 'tis vain thy damsel to commend
    To keeper's trust: their wits should them defend.
    Who, without fear, is chaste, is chaste in sooth:
    Who, because means want, doeth not, she doth.
    Though thou her body guard, her mind is stained;
    Nor, 'less[365] she will, can any be restrained.
    Nor can'st by watching keep her mind from sin,
    All being shut out, the adulterer is within.
    Who may offend, sins least; power to do ill
    The fainting seeds of naughtiness doth kill.                      10
    Forbear to kindle vice by prohibition;
    Sooner shall kindness gain thy will's fruition.
    I saw a horse against the bit stiff-necked,
    Like lightning go, his struggling mouth being checked:
    When he perceived the reins let slack, he stayed,
    And on his loose mane the loose bridle laid.
    How to attain what is denied we think,
    Even as the sick desire forbidden drink.
    Argus had either way an hundred eyes,
    Yet by deceit Love did them all surprise.                         20
    In stone and iron walls Dane shut,
    Came forth a mother, though a maid there put.
    Penelope, though no watch looked unto her,
    Was not defiled by any gallant wooer.
    What's kept, we covet more: the care makes theft,
    Few love what others have unguarded left.
    Nor doth her face please, but her husband's love:
    I know not what men think should thee so move[366]
    She is not chaste that's kept, but a dear whore:[367]
    Thy fear is than her body valued more.                            30
    Although thou chafe, stolen pleasure is sweet play;
    She pleaseth best, "I fear," if any say.
    A free-born wench, no right 'tis up to lock,
    So use we women of strange nations' stock.
    Because the keeper may come say, "I did it,"
    She must be honest to thy servant's credit.
    He is too clownish whom a lewd wife grieves,
    And this town's well-known custom not believes;
    Where Mars his sons not without fault did breed,
    Remus and Romulus, Ilia's twin-born seed.                         40
    Cannot a fair one, if not chaste, please thee?
    Never can these by any means agree.
    Kindly thy mistress use, if thou be wise;
    Look gently, and rough husbands' laws despise.
    Honour what friends thy wife gives, she'll give many,
    Least labour so shall win great grace of any.
    So shalt thou go with youths to feasts together,
    And see at home much that thou ne'er brought'st thither.

FOOTNOTES:

[364] Not in Isham copy or ed. A.

[365] Old eds. "least." ("Nec custodiri, ni velit, ulla potest.")

[366] The original has "Nescio quid, quod te ceperit, esse putant."

[367] Dyce calls this line an "erroneous version of 'Non proba sit quam
vir servat, sed adultera; cara est.'" But Merkel's reading is "Non proba
fit quam vir servat, sed adultera cara"--which is accurately rendered by
Marlowe.




ELEGIA VI.[368]

Ad amnem dum iter faceret ad amicam.


    Flood with reed-grown[369] slime banks, till I be past
    Thy waters stay: I to my mistress haste.
    Thou hast no bridge, nor boat with ropes to throw,
    That may transport me, without oars to row.
    Thee I have passed, and knew thy stream none such,
    When thy wave's brim did scarce my ankles touch.
    With snow thawed from the next hill now thou gushest,[370]
    And in thy foul deep waters thick thou rushest.
    What helps my haste? what to have ta'en small rest?
    What day and night to travel in her quest?                        10
    If standing here I can by no means get
    My foot upon the further bank to set.
    Now wish I those wings noble Perseus had,
    Bearing the head with dreadful adders[371] clad;
    Now wish the chariot, whence corn fields were found,
    First to be thrown upon the untilled ground:
    I speak old poet's wonderful inventions,
    Ne'er was, nor [e'er] shall be, what my verse mentions.
    Rather, thou large bank-overflowing river,
    Slide in thy bounds; so shalt thou run for ever.                  20
    Trust me, land-stream, thou shalt no envy lack,
    If I a lover be by thee held back.
    Great floods ought to assist young men in love,
    Great floods the force of it do often prove.
    In mid Bithynia,[372] 'tis said, Inachus
    Grew pale, and, in cold fords, hot lecherous.
    Troy had not yet been ten years' siege out stander,
    When nymph Nera rapt thy looks, Scamander.
    What, not Alpheus in strange lands to run,
    The Arcadian virgin's constant love hath won?                     30
    And Creusa unto Xanthus first affied,
    They say Peneus near Phthia's town did hide.
    What should I name Asop,[373] that Thebe loved,
    Thebe who mother of five daughters proved,
    If, Achelus, I ask where thy horns stand,
    Thou say'st, broke with Alcides' angry hand.
    Not Calydon, nor tolia did please;
    One Deianira was more worth than these.
    Rich Nile by seven mouths to the vast sea flowing,
    Who so well keeps his water's head from knowing,                  40
    Is by Evadne thought to take such flame,
    As his deep whirlpools could not quench the same.
    Dry Enipeus, Tyro to embrace,
    Fly back his stream[374] charged; the stream charged, gave place.
    Nor pass I thee, who hollow rocks down tumbling,
    In Tibur's field with watery foam art rumbling.
    Whom Ilia pleased, though in her looks grief revelled,
    Her cheeks were scratched, her goodly hairs dishevelled.
    She, wailing Mar's sin and her uncle's crime,
    Strayed barefoot through sole places[375] on a time.              50
    Her, from his swift waves, the bold flood perceived,
    And from the mid ford his hoarse voice upheaved,
    Saying, "Why sadly tread'st my banks upon,
    Ilia sprung from Idan Laomedon?
    Where's thy attire? why wanderest here alone?
    To stay thy tresses white veil hast thou none?
    Why weep'st and spoil'st with tears thy watery eyes?
    And fiercely knock'st thy breast that open lies?
    His heart consists of flint and hardest steel,
    That seeing thy tears can any joy then feel.                      60
    Fear not: to thee our court stands open wide,
    There shalt be loved: Ilia, lay fear aside.
    Thou o'er a hundred nymphs or more shalt reign,
    For five score nymphs or more our floods contain.
    Nor, Roman stock, scorn me so much I crave,
    Gifts than my promise greater thou shalt have."[376]
    This said he: she her modest eyes held down.
    Her woful bosom a warm shower did drown.
    Thrice she prepared to fly, thrice she did stay,
    By fear deprived of strength to run away.                         70
    Yet rending with enragd thumb her tresses,
    Her trembling mouth these unmeet sounds expresses:
    "O would in my forefathers' tomb deep laid,
    My bones had been while yet I was a maid:
    Why being a vestal am I wooed to wed,
    Deflowered and staind in unlawful bed.
    Why stay I? men point at me for a whore,
    Shame, that should make me blush, I have no more."
    This said; her coat hoodwinked her fearful eyes,
    And into water desperately she flies.                             80
    'Tis said the slippery stream held up her breast,
    And kindly gave her what she likd best.
    And I believe some wench thou hast affected,
    But woods and groves keep your faults undetected.
    While thus I speak the waters more abounded,
    And from the channel all abroad surrounded.
    Mad stream, why dost our mutual joys defer?
    Clown, from my journey why dost me deter?
    How would'st thou flow wert thou a noble flood?
    If thy great fame in every region stood?                          90
    Thou hast no name, but com'st from snowy mountains;
    No certain house thou hast, nor any fountains;
    Thy springs are nought but rain and melted snow,
    Which wealth cold winter doth on thee bestow.
    Either thou art muddy in mid-winter tide,
    Or full of dust dost on the dry earth slide.
    What thirsty traveller ever drunk of thee?
    Who said with grateful voice, "Perpetual be!"
    Harmful to beasts, and to the fields thou proves,
    Perchance these[377] others, me mine own loss moves.             100
    To this I fondly[378] loves of floods told plainly,
    I shame so great names to have used so vainly.
    I know not what expecting, I ere while,
    Named Achelus, Inachus, and Nile.[379]
    But for thy merits I wish thee, white stream,[380]
    Dry winters aye, and suns in heat extreme.

FOOTNOTES:

[368] Not in Isham copy or ed. A.--In the old copies this elegy is
marked "Elegia v." The fifth elegy (beginning "Nox erat et somnus," &c.)
was not contained in Marlowe's copy.

[369] Old eds. "redde-growne."

[370] So Dyce for "rushest" of the old eds.

[371] So Dyce for "arrowes" of the old eds.

[372] The original has "Inachus in Melie Bithynide pallidus isse."
&c.--Dyce suggests that Marlowe's copy had "in _media_ Bithynide."

[373] Old eds. "Aesope."

[374] Old eds. "shame."

[375] "Loca sola."

[376] The original has "Desit famosus qui notet ora pudor" (or "Desint
... quae," &c.)

[377] "Forsitan haec alios, me mea damna movent."

[378] "Demens."

[379] Old eds. "Ile."

[380] Marlowe read "nunc candide" for "non candide."




ELEGIA VII.

Quod ab amica receptus, cum ea coire non potuit, conqueritur.


    Either she was foul, or her attire was bad,
    Or she was not the wench I wished to have had.
    Idly I lay with her, as if I loved not,
    And like a burden grieved the bed that moved not.
    Though both of us performed our true intent,
    Yet could I not cast anchor where I meant.
    She on my neck her ivory arms did throw,
    Her[381] arms far whiter than the Scythian snow.
    And eagerly she kissed me with her tongue,
    And under mine her wanton thigh she flung,                        10
    Yea, and she soothed me up, and called me "Sir,"[382]
    And used all speech that might provoke and stir.
    Yet like as if cold hemlock I had drunk,
    It mockd me, hung down the head and sunk.
    Like a dull cipher, or rude block I lay,
    Or shade, or body was I, who can say?
    What will my age do, age I cannot shun,
    Seeing[383] in my prime my force is spent and done?
    I blush, that being youthful, hot, and lusty,
    I prove neither youth nor man, but old and rusty.                 20
    Pure rose she, like a nun to sacrifice,
    Or one that with her tender brother lies.
    Yet boarded I the golden Chie[384] twice,
    And Libas, and the white-cheeked Pitho thrice.
    Corinna craved it in a summer's night,
    And nine sweet bouts had we[385] before daylight.
    What, waste my limbs through some Thessalian charms?
    May spells and drugs do silly souls such harms?
    With virgin wax hath some imbast[386] my joints?
    And pierced my liver with sharp needle-points?[387]               30
    Charms change corn to grass and make it die:
    By charms are running springs and fountains dry.
    By charms mast drops from oaks, from vines grapes fall,
    And fruit from trees when there's no wind at all.
    Why might not then my sinews be enchanted?
    And I grow faint as with some spirit haunted?
    To this, add shame: shame to perform it quailed me,
    And was the second cause why vigour failed me.
    My idle thoughts delighted her no more,
    Than did the robe or garment which she wore.                      40
    Yet might her touch make youthful Pylius fire,
    And Tithon livelier than his years require.
    Even her I had, and she had me in vain,
    What might I crave more, if I ask again?
    I think the great gods grieved they had bestowed,
    This[388] benefit: which lewdly[389] I foreslowed.[390]
    I wished to be received in, in[391] I get me.
    To kiss, I kiss;[392] to lie with her, she let me.
    Why was I blest? why made king to refuse[393] it?
    Chuff-like had I not gold and could not use it?                   50
    So in a spring thrives he that told so much,[394]
    And looks upon the fruits he cannot touch.
    Hath any rose so from a fresh young maid,
    As she might straight have gone to church and prayed?
    Well, I believe, she kissed not as she should,
    Nor used the sleight and[395] cunning which she could.
    Huge oaks, hard adamants might she have moved,
    And with sweet words caus[ed] deaf rocks to have loved.
    Worthy she was to move both gods and men,
    But neither was I man nor livd then.                             60
    Can deaf ears[396] take delight when Phmius sings?
    Or Thamyris in curious painted things?
    What sweet thought is there but I had the same?
    And one gave place still as another came.
    Yet notwithstanding, like one dead it lay,
    Drooping more than a rose pulled yesterday.
    Now, when he should not jet, he bolts upright,
    And craves his task, and seeks to be at fight.
    Lie down with shame, and see thou stir no more.
    Seeing thou[397] would'st deceive me as before.                   70
    Thou cozenest me: by thee surprised am I,
    And bide sore loss[398] with endless infamy.
    Nay more, the wench did not disdain a whit
    To take it in her hand, and play with it.
    But when she saw it would by no means stand,
    But still drooped down, regarding not her hand,
    "Why mock'st thou me," she cried, "or being ill,
    Who bade thee lie down here against thy will?
    Either thou art witched with blood of frogs[399] new dead,
    Or jaded cam'st thou from some other's bed."                      80
    With that, her loose gown on, from me she cast her;
    In skipping out her naked feet much graced her.
    And lest her maid should know of this disgrace,
    To cover it, spilt water in the place.

FOOTNOTES:

[381] So eds. B, C.--Isham copy and ed. A:--

    "That were as white as is the Scithian snow."

[382] "Dominumque vocavit."

[383] So Isham copy and ed. A.--Eds. B, C "When."

[384] "Flava Chlide."

[385] So Isham copy and ed. A.--Eds. B, C "we had."

[386] The verb "embase" or "imbase" is frequently found in the sense of
"abase." Here the meaning seems to be "weakened, enfeebled." (Ovid's
words are "Sagave poenicea defixit nomina cera.")

[387] So Isham copy and ed. A ("needle points").--Eds. B, C "needles'
points."

[388] So Isham copy and ed. A.--Eds. B, C "The."

[389] "Turpiter."

[390] Neglected.

[391] So eds. B, C.--Isham copy "received in, _and_ in I _got_ me."

[392] So old eds.--Dyce reads "kiss'd."

[393] So eds. B, C.--Isham copy and ed. A "and refusde it."

[394] "Sic aret mediis taciti vulgator in undis."

[395] So eds. B, C.--Isham copy and ed. A "nor."

[396] Isham copy "yeares;" ed. A "yeres;" eds. B, C "eare."

[397] So eds. B, C.--Isham copy and ed. A "Seeing now thou."

[398] So eds. B, C.--Isham copy and ed. A "great hurt."

[399] The original has "Aut te trajectis Aeaea venefica _lanis_," &c.
(As Dyce remarks, Marlowe read "ranis.")




ELEGIA VIII.[400]

Quod ad amica non recipiatur, dolet.


    What man will now take liberal arts in hand,
    Or think soft verse in any stead to stand?
    Wit was sometimes more precious than gold;
    Now poverty great barbarism we hold.
    When our books did my mistress fair content,
    I might not go whither my papers went.
    She praised me, yet the gate shut fast upon her,
    I here and there go, witty with dishonour.
    See a rich chuff, whose wounds great wealth inferred,
    For bloodshed knighted, before me preferred.                      10
    Fool, can'st thou him in thy white arms embrace?
    Fool, can'st thou lie in his enfolding space?
    Know'st not this head[401] a helm was wont to bear?
    This side that serves thee, a sharp sword did wear.
    His left hand, whereon gold doth ill alight,
    A target bore: blood-sprinkled was his right.
    Can'st touch that hand wherewith some one lies dead?
    Ah, whither is thy breast's soft nature fled?
    Behold the signs of ancient fight, his scars!
    Whate'er he hath, his body gained in wars.                        20
    Perhaps he'll tell how oft he slew a man,
    Confessing this, why dost thou touch him than?[402]
    I, the pure priest of Phoebus and the Muses,
    At thy deaf doors in verse sing my abuses.
    Not what we slothful know,[403] let wise men learn,
    But follow trembling camps and battles stern.
    And for a good verse draw the first dart forth:[404]
    Homer without this shall be nothing worth.
    Jove, being admonished gold had sovereign power,
    To win the maid came in a golden shower.                          30
    Till then, rough was her father, she severe,
    The posts of brass, the walls of iron were.
    But when in gifts the wise adulterer came,
    She held her lap ope to receive the same.
    Yet when old Saturn heaven's rule possest,
    All gain in darkness the deep earth supprest.
    Gold, silver, iron's heavy weight, and brass,
    In hell were harboured; here was found no mass.
    But better things it gave, corn without ploughs,
    Apples, and honey in oaks' hollow boughs.                         40
    With strong ploughshares no man the earth did cleave,
    The ditcher no marks on the ground did leave.
    Nor hanging oars the troubled seas did sweep,
    Men kept the shore and sailed not into deep.
    Against thyself, man's nature, thou wert cunning,
    And to thine own loss was thy wit swift running.
    Why gird'st thy cities with a towerd wall,
    Why let'st discordant hands to armour fall?
    What dost with seas? with th' earth thou wert content;
    Why seek'st not heaven, the third realm, to frequent?             50
    Heaven thou affects: with Romulus, temples brave,
    Bacchus, Alcides, and now Csar have.
    Gold from the earth instead of fruits we pluck;
    Soldiers by blood to be enriched have luck.
    Courts shut the poor out; wealth gives estimation.
    Thence grows the judge, and knight of reputation.
    All,[405] they possess: they govern fields and laws,
    They manage peace and raw war's bloody jaws.
    Only our loves let not such rich churls gain:
    'Tis well if some wench for the poor remain.                      60
    Now, Sabine-like, though chaste she seems to live,
    One her[406] commands, who many things can give.
    For me, she doth keeper[407] and husband fear,
    If I should give, both would the house forbear.
    If of scorned lovers god be venger just,
    O let him change goods so ill-got to dust.

FOOTNOTES:

[400] Not in Isham copy or ed. A.

[401] So ed. B.--Ed. C "his." ("Caput _hoc_ galeam portare solebat.")

[402] Then.

[403] Old eds. knew.

[404] Marlowe has quite mistaken the meaning of the original "Proque
bono versu primum deducite pilum."

[405] A very loose rendering of Ovid's couplet--

    "Omnia possideant; illis Campusque Forumque
      Serviat; hi pacem crudaque bella gerant."

[406] So Dyce for "she" of the old eds. ("Imperat ut captae qui dare
multa potest.")

[407] The original has "Me prohibet custos: in me timet illa maritum."




ELEGIA IX.[408]

Tibulli mortem deflet.


    If Thetis and the Morn their sons did wail,
    And envious Fates great goddesses assail;
    Sad Elegy,[409] thy woful hairs unbind:
    Ah, now a name too true thou hast I find.
    Tibullus, thy work's poet, and thy fame,
    Burns his dead body in the funeral flame.
    Lo, Cupid brings his quiver spoild quite,
    His broken bow, his firebrand without light!
    How piteously with drooping wings he stands,
    And knocks his bare breast with self-angry hands.                 10
    The locks spread on his neck receive his tears,
    And shaking sobs his mouth for speeches bears.
    So[410] at neas' burial, men report,
    Fair-faced Ilus, he went forth thy court.
    And Venus grieves, Tibullus' life being spent,
    As when the wild boar Adon's groin had rent.
    The gods' care we are called, and men of piety,
    And some there be that think we have a deity.
    Outrageous death profanes all holy things,
    And on all creatures obscure darkness brings.                     20
    To Thracian Orpheus what did parents good?
    Or songs amazing wild beasts of the wood?
    Where[411] Linus by his father Phoebus laid,
    To sing with his unequalled harp is said.
    See Homer from whose fountain ever filled
    Pierian dew to poets is distilled:
    Him the last day in black Avern hath drowned:
    Verses alone are with continuance crowned.
    The work of poets lasts: Troy's labour's fame,
    And that slow web night's falsehood did unframe.                  30
    So Nemesis, so Delia famous are,
    The one his first love, th' other his new care.
    What profit to us hath our pure life bred?
    What to have lain alone in empty bed?
    When bad Fates take good men, I am forbod
    By secret thoughts to think there is a God.
    Live godly, thou shalt die; though honour heaven,
    Yet shall thy life be forcibly bereaven.
    Trust in good verse, Tibullus feels death's pains,
    Scarce rests of all what a small urn contains.                    40
    Thee, sacred poet, could sad flames destroy?
    Nor feard they thy body to annoy?
    The holy gods' gilt temples they might fire,
    That durst to so great wickedness aspire.
    Eryx' bright empress turned her looks aside,
    And some, that she refrained tears, have denied.
    Yet better is't, than if Corcyra's Isle,
    Had thee unknown interred in ground most vile.
    Thy dying eyes here did thy mother close,
    Nor did thy ashes her last offerings lose.                        50
    Part of her sorrow here thy sister bearing,
    Comes forth, her unkembed[412] locks asunder tearing.
    Nemesis and thy first wench join their kisses
    With thine, nor this last fire their presence misses.
    Delia departing, "Happier loved," she saith,
    "Was I: thou liv'dst, while thou esteem'dst my faith."
    Nemesis answers, "What's my loss to thee?
    His fainting hand in death engraspd me."
    If aught remains of us but name and spirit,
    Tibullus doth Elysium's joy inherit.                              60
    Their youthful brows with ivy girt to meet him,
    With Calvus learned Catullus comes, and greet him;
    And thou, if falsely charged to wrong thy friend,
    Callus, that car'dst[413] not blood and life to spend,
    With these thy soul walks: souls if death release,
    The godly[414] sweet Tibullus doth increase.
    Thy bones, I pray, may in the urn safe rest,
    And may th' earth's weight thy ashes naught molest.

FOOTNOTES:

[408] Not in Isham copy or ed. A.

[409] Ed. B "Eeliga"--Ed. C "Elegia."

[410]

    "Fratris in Aeneae sic illum funere dicunt
      Egressum tectis, pulcher Iule, tuis."

[411] The original has--

    "Aelinon in silvis idem pater, aelinon, altis
      Dicitur invita concinuisse lyra."

In Marlowe's copy the couplet must have been very different.

[412] Old eds. "vnkeembe" and "unkeemb'd."

[413] Old eds. "carst."

[414] "Auxisti numeros, culte Tibulle, pios."




ELEGIA X.[415]

Ad Cererem, conquerens quod ejus sacris cum amica concumbere non
permittatur.


    Come were the times of Ceres' sacrifice;
    In empty bed alone my mistress lies.
    Golden-haired Ceres crowned with ears of corn,
    Why are our pleasures by thy means forborne?
    Thee, goddess, bountiful all nations judge,
    Nor less at man's prosperity any grudge.
    Rude husbandmen baked not their corn before,
    Nor on the earth was known the name of floor.[416]
    On mast of oaks, first oracles, men fed;
    This was their meat, the soft grass was their bed.                10
    First Ceres taught the seed in fields to swell,
    And ripe-eared corn with sharp-edged scythes to fell.
    She first constrained bulls' necks to bear the yoke,
    And untilled ground with crooked ploughshares broke.
    Who thinks her to be glad at lovers' smart,
    And worshipped by their pain and lying apart?
    Nor is she, though she loves the fertile fields,
    A clown, nor no love from her warm breast yields:
    Be witness Crete (nor Crete doth all things feign)
    Crete proud that Jove her nursery maintain.                       20
    There, he who rules the world's star-spangled towers,
    A little boy drunk teat-distilling showers.
    Faith to the witness Jove's praise doth apply;
    Ceres, I think, no known fault will deny.
    The goddess saw Iasion on Candian Ide,
    With strong hand striking wild beasts' bristled hide.
    She saw, and as her marrow took the flame,
    Was divers ways distract with love and shame.
    Love conquered shame, the furrows dry were burned,
    And corn with least part of itself returned.                      30
    When well-tossed mattocks did the ground prepare,
    Being fit-broken with the crooked share,
    And seeds were equally in large fields cast,
    The ploughman's hopes were frustrate at the last.
    The grain-rich goddess in high woods did stray,
    Her long hair's ear-wrought garland fell away.
    Only was Crete fruitful that plenteous year;
    Where Ceres went, each place was harvest there.
    Ida, the seat of groves, did sing[417] with corn,
    Which by the wild boar in the woods was shorn.                    40
    Law-giving Minos did such years desire,
    And wished the goddess long might feel love's fire.
    Ceres, what sports[418] to thee so grievous were,
    As in thy sacrifice we them forbear?
    Why am I sad, when Proserpine is found,
    And Juno-like with Dis reigns under ground?
    Festival days ask Venus, songs, and wine,
    These gifts are meet to please the powers divine.

FOOTNOTES:

[415] Not in Isham copy or ed. A.

[416] Threshing-floor ("area").

[417] Marlowe has made the school-boy's mistake of confusing "caneo" and
"cano."

[418] The original has

    "Quod tibi secubitus tristes, dea flava, fuissent,
      Hoc cogor sacris nunc ego ferre tuis."

Marlowe appears to have read "Qui tibi concubitus," &c.




ELEGIA XI.[419]

Ad amicam a cujus amore discedere non potest.


    Long have I borne much, mad thy faults me make;
    Dishonest love, my wearied breast forsake!
    Now have I freed myself, and fled the chain,
    And what I have borne, shame to bear again.
    We vanquish, and tread tamed love under feet,
    Victorious wreaths[420] at length my temples greet.
    Suffer, and harden: good grows by this grief,
    Oft bitter juice brings to the sick relief.
    I have sustained, so oft thrust from the door,
    To lay my body on the hard moist floor.                           10
    I know not whom thou lewdly didst embrace,
    When I to watch supplied a servant's place.
    I saw when forth a tird lover went.
    His side past service, and his courage spent,
    Yet this is less than if he had seen me;
    May that shame fall mine enemies' chance to be.
    When have not I, fixed to thy side, close laid?
    I have thy husband, guard, and fellow played.
    The people by my company she pleased;
    My love was cause that more men's love she seized.                20
    What, should I tell her vain tongue's filthy lies,
    And, to my loss, god-wronging perjuries?
    What secret becks in banquets with her youths,
    With privy signs, and talk dissembling truths?
    Hearing her to be sick, I thither ran,
    But with my rival sick she was not than.
    These hardened me, with what I keep obscure:[421]
    Some other seek, who will these things endure.
    Now my ship in the wishd haven crowned,
    With joy hears Neptune's swelling waters sound.                   30
    Leave thy once-powerful words, and flatteries,
    I am not as I was before, unwise.
    Now love and hate my light breast each way move,
    But victory, I think, will hap to love.
    I'll hate, if I can; if not, love 'gainst my will,
    Bulls hate the yoke, yet what they hate have still.
    I fly her lust, but follow beauty's creature,
    I loathe her manners, love her body's feature.
    Nor with thee, nor without thee can I live,
    And doubt to which desire the palm to give.                       40
    Or less fair, or less lewd would thou might'st be:
    Beauty with lewdness doth right ill agree.
    Her deeds gain hate, her face entreateth love;
    Ah, she doth more worth than her vices prove!
    Spare me, oh, by our fellow bed, by all
    The gods, who by thee, to be perjured fall.[422]
    And by thy face to me a power divine,
    And by thine eyes, whose radiance burns out mine!
    Whate'er thou art, mine art thou: choose this course,
    Wilt have me willing, or to love by force.                        50
    Rather I'll hoist up sail, and use the wind,
    That I may love yet, though against my mind.

FOOTNOTES:

[419] Not in Isham copy or ed. A.

[420] The original has "Venerunt capiti cornua sera meo."

[421] "Et que taceo."

[422] "Qui dant fallendos se tibi saepe, deos."




ELEGIA XII.[423]

Dolet amicam suam ita suis carminibus innotuisse ut rivales multos sibi
pararit.


    What day was that, which all sad haps to bring,
    White birds to lovers did not[424] always sing?
    Or is I think my wish against the stars?
    Or shall I plain some god against me wars?
    Who mine was called, whom I loved more than any,
    I fear with me is common now to many.
    Err I? or by my books[425] is she so known?
    'Tis so: by my wit her abuse is grown.
    And justly: for her praise why did I tell?
    The wench by my fault is set forth to sell.                       10
    The bawd I play, lovers to her I guide:
    Her gate by my hands is set open wide.
    'Tis doubtful whether verse avail or harm,
    Against my good they were an envious charm.
    When Thebes, when Troy, when Csar should be writ,
    Alone Corinna moves my wanton wit.
    With Muse opposed, would I my lines had done,
    And Phoebus had forsook my work begun!
    Nor, as use will not poets' record hear,
    Would I my words would any credit bear.                           20
    Scylla by us her father's rich hair steals,
    And Scylla's womb mad raging dogs conceals.
    We cause feet fly, we mingle hares with snakes,
    Victorious Perseus a winged steed's back takes.
    Our verse great Tityus a huge space outspreads,
    And gives the viper-curld dog three heads.
    We make Enceladus use a thousand arms,
    And men enthralled by mermaid's[426] singing charms.
    The east winds in Ulysses' bags we shut,
    And blabbing Tantalus in mid-waters put.                          30
    Niobe flint, Callist we make a bear,
    Bird-changd Progne doth her Itys tear.[427]
    Jove turns himself into a swan, or gold,
    Or his bull's horns Europa's hand doth hold.
    Proteus what should I name? teeth, Thebes' first seed?
    Oxen in whose mouths burning flames did breed?
    Heaven-star, Electra,[428] that bewailed her sisters?
    The ships, whose godhead in the sea now glisters?
    The sun turned back from Atreus' cursed table?                    39
    And sweet-touched harp that to move stones was able?
    Poets' large power is boundless and immense,
    Nor have their words true history's pretence.
    And my wench ought to have seemed falsely praised,
    Now your credulity harm to me hath raised.

FOOTNOTES:

[423] Not in Isham copy or ed. A.

[424] Marlowe has put his negative in the wrong place and made nonsense
of the couplet:--

    "Quis fuit ille dies quo tristia semper amanti
      Omina non albae concinuistis aves?"

[425] Old eds. "lookes."

[426] "Ambiguae captos virginis ore viros." ("Ambigua virgo" is the
sphinx.)

[427] The original has "_Concinit_ Odrysium Cecropis ales Ityn."

[428] Marlowe's copy must have been very corrupt here. The true reading
is

    "Flere genis electra tuas, auriga, sorores?"




ELEGIA XIII.[429]

De Junonis festo.


    When fruit-filled Tuscia should a wife give me,
    We touched the walls, Camillus, won by thee.
    The priests to Juno did prepare chaste feasts,
    With famous pageants, and their home-bred beasts.
    To know their rites well recompensed my stay,
    Though thither leads a rough steep hilly way.
    There stands an old wood with thick trees dark clouded:
    Who sees it grants some deity there is shrouded.
    An altar takes men's incense and oblation,
    An altar made after the ancient fashion.                          10
    Here, when the pipe with solemn tunes doth sound,
    The annual pomp goes on the covered[430] ground.
    White heifers by glad people forth are led,
    Which with the grass of Tuscan fields are fed,
    And calves from whose feared front no threatening flies,
    And little pigs, base hogsties' sacrifice,
    And rams with horns their hard heads wreathd back;
    Only the goddess-hated goat did lack,
    By whom disclosed, she in the high woods took,
    Is said to have attempted flight forsook.                         20
    Now[431] is the goat brought through the boys with darts,
    And give[n] to him that the first wound imparts.
    Where Juno comes, each youth and pretty maid,
    Show[432] large ways, with their garments there displayed.
    Jewels and gold their virgin tresses crown,
    And stately robes to their gilt feet hang down.
    As is the use, the nuns in white veils clad,
    Upon their heads the holy mysteries had.
    When the chief pomp comes, loud[433] the people hollow;
    And she her vestal virgin priests doth follow.                    30
    Such was the Greek pomp, Agamemnon dead;
    Which fact[434] and country wealth, Halesus fled.
    And having wandered now through sea and land,
    Built walls high towered with a prosperous hand.
    He to th' Hetrurians Juno's feast commended:
    Let me and them by it be aye befriended.

FOOTNOTES:

[429] Not in Isham copy or ed. A.

[430] "It per velatas annua pompa vias."

[431]

    "Nunc quoque per pueros jaculis incessitur index
      Et pretium auctori vulneris ipsa datur."

[432] "Praeverrunt latas veste jacente vias."--Dyce remarks that Marlowe
read "Praebuerant."

[433] "Ore favent populi." (In Henry's monumental edition of Virgil's
neid, vol. iii. pp. 25-27, there is a very interesting note on the
meaning of the formula "ore favete." He denies the correctness of the
ordinary interpretation "be silent.")

[434] "Et _scelus_ et patrias fugit Halsus opes."




ELEGIA XIV.

Ad amicam, si peccatura est, ut occulte peccet.


    Seeing thou art fair, I bar not thy false playing,
    But let not me, poor soul, know[435] of thy straying.
    Nor do I give thee counsel to live chaste,
    But that thou would'st dissemble, when 'tis past.
    She hath not trod awry, that doth deny it.
    Such as confess have lost their good names by it.
    What madness is't to tell night-pranks[436] by day?
    And[437] hidden secrets openly to bewray?
    The strumpet with the stranger will not do,
    Before the room be clear and door put-to.                         10
    Will you make shipwreck of your honest name,
    And let the world be witness of the same?
    Be more advised, walk as a puritan,
    And I shall think you chaste, do what you can.
    Slip still, only deny it when 'tis done,
    And, before folk,[438] immodest speeches shun.
    The bed is for lascivious toyings meet,
    There use all tricks,[439] and tread shame under feet.
    When you are up and dressed, be sage and grave,
    And in the bed hide all the faults you have.                      20
    Be not ashamed to strip you, being there,
    And mingle thighs, yours ever mine to bear.[440]
    There in your rosy lips my tongue entomb,
    Practise a thousand sports when there you come.
    Forbear no wanton words you there would speak,
    And with your pastime let the bedstead creak;
    But with your robes put on an honest face,
    And blush, and seem as you were full of grace.
    Deceive all; let me err; and think I'm right,
    And like a wittol think thee void of slight.                      30
    Why see I lines so oft received and given?
    This bed and that by tumbling made uneven?
    Like one start up your hair tost and displaced,
    And with a wanton's tooth your neck new-rased.
    Grant this, that what you do I may not see;
    If you weigh not ill speeches, yet weigh me.
    My soul fleets[441] when I think what you have done,
    And thorough[442] every vein doth cold blood run.
    Then thee whom I must love, I hate in vain,
    And would be dead, but dead[443] with thee remain.                40
    I'll not sift much, but hold thee soon excused.
    Say but thou wert injuriously accused.
    Though while the deed be doing you be took,
    And I see when you ope the two-leaved book,[444]
    Swear I was blind; deny[445] if you be wise,
    And I will trust your words more than mine eyes.
    From him that yields, the palm[446] is quickly got,
    Teach but your tongue to say, "I did it not,"
    And being justified by two words, think
    The cause acquits you not, but I[447] that wink.                  50

FOOTNOTES:

[435] So Isham copy and eds. B, C.--Ed. A "wit."

[436] So Isham copy.--Ed. A "night-sports."

[437] So eds. B, C.--Isham copy and ed. A "Or."

[438] So Isham copy.--Ed. A "people."

[439] So Isham copy.--Ed. A "toyes."

[440] So eds. B, C.--Isham copy and ed. A "mine ever yours."

[441] "Mens abit."

[442] So eds. B, C.--Isham copy and ed. A "through."

[443] So eds. B, C.--Isham copy and ed. A "dying."

[444] The original has

    "Et fuerint oculis probra videnda meis."

[445] So eds. B, C.--Isham copy and ed. A "yeeld not."

[446] So eds. B, C.--Isham copy and ed. A "garland."

[447] So Isham copy and eds. A, B.--Ed. C "that I."




ELEGIA XV.[448]

Ad Venerem, quod elegis finem imponat.


    Tender Loves' mother[449] a new poet get,
    This last end to my Elegies is set.[450]
    Which I, Peligny's foster-child, have framed,
    Nor am I by such wanton toys defamed.
    Heir of an ancient house, if help that can,
    Not only by war's rage[451] made gentleman.
    In Virgil Mantua joys: in Catull Verone;
    Of me Peligny's nation boasts alone;
    Whom liberty to honest arms compelled,
    When careful Rome in doubt their prowess held.[452]               10
    And some guest viewing watery Sulmo's walls,
    Where little ground to be enclosed befalls,
    "How such a poet could you bring forth?" says:
    "How small soe'er, I'll you for greatest praise."
    Both loves, to whom my heart long time did yield,[453]
    Your golden ensigns pluck[454] out of my field.
    Horned Bacchus graver fury doth distil,
    A greater ground with great horse is to till.
    Weak Elegies, delightful Muse, farewell;
    A work that, after my death, here shall dwell.                    20

FOOTNOTES:

[448] Not in Isham copy or ed. A.

[449] "Tenerorum mater amorum."

[450] "Marlowe's copy of Ovid had 'Traditur haec elegis ultima charta
meis.'"--Dyce. (The true reading is "Raditur hic ... meta meis.")

[451] "Non modo militiae turbine factus eques."

[452] "Cum timuit socias anxia turba manus."

[453] "Marlowe's copy of Ovid had 'Culte puer, puerique parens _mihi
tempore longo_.' (instead of what we now read 'Amathusia
culti.')"--Dyce.

[454] Old eds. "pluckt."




EPIGRAMS BY J[OHN] D[AVIES].




EPIGRAMS BY J[OHN] D[AVIES].[455]




AD MUSAM. I.


    Fly, merry Muse, unto that merry town,
    Where thou mayst plays, revels, and triumphs see;
    The house of fame, and theatre of renown,
    Where all good wits and spirits love to be.
    Fall in between their hands that praise and love thee,[456]
    And be to them a laughter and a jest:
    But as for them which scorning shall reprove[457] thee,
    Disdain their wits, and think thine own the best.
    But if thou find any so gross and dull,
    That thinks I do to private taxing[458] lean,                     10
    Bid him go hang, for he is but a gull,
    And knows not what an epigram doth[459] mean,
    Which taxeth,[460] under a particular name,
    A general vice which merits public blame.

FOOTNOTES:

[455] Dyce has carefully recorded the readings of a MS. copy (_Harl.
MS._ 1836) of the present epigrams. As in most cases the variations are
unimportant, I have not thought it necessary to reproduce Dyce's
elaborate collation. Where the MS. readings are distinctly preferable I
have adopted them; but in such cases I have been careful to record the
readings of the printed copies.

[456] So Dyce.--Old eds. "loue and praise thee;" MS. "Seeme to love
thee."

[457] So Isham copy and MS. Ed. A "approve."

[458] Censuring. Dyce compares the Induction to the _Knight of the
Burning Pestle_:--

          "Fly far from hence
    All _private taxes_."

[459] So MS.--Old eds. "does."

[460] MS. "Which carrieth under a peculiar name."




OF A GULL. II.


    Oft in my laughing rhymes I name a gull;
    But this new term will many questions breed;
    Therefore at first I will express at full,
    Who is a true and perfect gull indeed.
    A gull is he who fears a velvet gown,
    And, when a wench is brave, dares not speak to her;
    A gull is he which traverseth the town,
    And is for marriage known a common wooer;
    A gull is he which, while he proudly wears
    A silver-hilted rapier by his side,                               10
    Endures the lie[461] and knocks about the ears,
    Whilst in his sheath his sleeping sword doth bide;
    A gull is he which wears good handsome clothes,
    And stands in presence stroking up his hair,
    And fills up his unperfect speech with oaths,
    But speaks not one wise word throughout the year:
    But, to define a gull in terms precise,--
    A gull is he which seems and is not wise.[462]

FOOTNOTES:

[461] So MS.--Old eds. "lies."

[462] "To this epigram there is an evident allusion in the following one

                           'TO CANDIDUS.
    Friend Candidus, thou often doost demaund
    What humours men by gulling understand.
    Our English Martiall hath full pleasantly
    In his close nips describde a gull to thee:
    I'le follow him, and set downe my conceit
    What a gull is--oh, word of much receit!
    He is a gull whose indiscretion
    Cracks his purse-strings to be in fashion;
    He is a gull who is long in taking roote
    In barraine soyle where can be but small fruite;
    He is a gull who runnes himselfe in debt
    For twelue dayes' wonder, hoping so to get;
    He is a gull whose conscience is a block,
    Not to take interest, but wastes his stock;
    He is a gull who cannot haue a whore,
    But brags how much he spends upon her score;
    He is a gull that for commoditie
    Payes tenne times ten, and sells the same for three;
    He is a gull who, passing finicall,
    Peiseth each word to be rhetoricall;
    And, to conclude, who selfe-conceitedly
    Thinks al men guls, ther's none more gull then he.'

                Guilpin's _Skialetheia, &c._ 1598, _Epig._ 20."
                                                    --_Dyce._




IN REFUM. III.


    Rufus the courtier, at the theatre,
    Leaving the best and most conspicuous place,
    Doth either to the stage[463] himself transfer,
    Or through a grate[464] doth show his double face,
    For that the clamorous fry of Inns of Court
    Fill up the private rooms of greater price,
    And such a place where all may have resort
    He in his singularity doth despise.
    Yet doth not his particular humour shun
    The common stews and brothels of the town,                        10
    Though all the world in troops do thither run,
    Clean and unclean, the gentle and the clown:
      Then why should Rufus in his pride abhor
      A common seat, that loves a common whore?

FOOTNOTES:

[463] It was a common practice for gallants to sit upon hired stools in
the stage, especially at the private theatres. From the _Induction_ to
Marston's _Malcontent_ it appears that the custom was not tolerated at
some of the public theatres. The ordinary charge for the use of a stool
was sixpence.

[464] Malone was no doubt right in supposing that there is here an
allusion to the "private boxes" placed at each side of the balcony at
the back of the stage. They must have been very dark and uncomfortable.
In the _Gull's Horn-Book_ Dekker says that "much new Satin was there
dampned by being smothered to death in darkness."




IN QUINTUM. IV.


    Quintus the dancer useth evermore
    His feet in measure and in rule to move:
    Yet on a time he call'd his mistress _whore_,
    And thought with that sweet word to win her love.
      O, had his tongue like to his feet been taught,
      It never would have utter'd such a thought!




IN PLURIMOS. V.[465]


    Faustinus, Sextus, Cinna, Ponticus,
    With Gella, Lesbia, Thais, Rhodope,
    Rode all to Staines,[466] for no cause serious,
    But for their mirth and for their lechery.
    Scarce were they settled in their lodging, when
    Wenches with wenches, men with men fell out,
    Men with their wenches, wenches with their men;
    Which straight dissolves[467] this ill-assembled rout.
    But since the devil brought them thus together,
    To my discoursing thoughts it is a wonder,                        10
    Why presently as soon as they came thither,
    The self-same devil did them part asunder.
      Doubtless, it seems, it was a foolish devil,
      That thus did part them ere they did some evil.

FOOTNOTES:

[465] MS. "In meritriculas Londinensis."

[466] MS. "Ware."

[467] MS. "dissolv'd"




IN TITUM. VI.


    Titus, the brave and valorous young gallant,
    Three years together in his town hath been;
    Yet my Lord Chancellor's[468] tomb he hath not seen,
    Nor the new water-work,[469] nor the elephant.
      I cannot tell the cause without a smile,--
      He hath been in the Counter all this while.

FOOTNOTES:

[468] Sir Christopher Hatton's tomb. See Dugdale's _History of St.
Paul's Cathedral_, ed. 1658, p. 83.

[469] "The new water-work was at London Bridge. The elephant was an
object of great wonder and long remembered. A curious illustration of
this is found in the _Metamorphosis of the Walnut Tree of Borestall_,
written about 1645, when the poet [William Basse] brings trees of all
descriptions to the funeral, particularly a gigantic oak--

    "The youth of these our times that did behold
      This motion strange of this unwieldy plant
    Now boldly brag with us that are men old,
      That of our age they no advantage want,
      Though in our youth we saw an elephant."
                                        --_Cunningham_.




IN FAUSTUM. VII.


    Faustus, nor lord nor knight, nor wise nor old,
    To every place about the town doth ride;
    He rides into the fields[470] plays to behold,
    He rides to take boat at the water-side,
    He rides to Paul's, he rides to th' ordinary,
    He rides unto the house of bawdry too,--
    Thither his horse so often doth him carry,
    That shortly he will quite forget to go.

FOOTNOTES:

[470] See the admirable account of "The Theatre and Curtain" in Mr.
Halliwell-Phillipps' _Outlines of the Life of Shakespeare_, ed. 3, pp.
385-433. It is there shown that the access to the _Theatre_ play-house
was through Finsbury Fields to the west of the western boundary-wall of
the grounds of the dissolved Holywell Priory.




IN KATAM.[471] VIII.


    Kate, being pleas'd, wish'd that her pleasure could
    Endure as long as a buff-jerkin would.
    Content thee, Kate; although thy pleasure wasteth,
    Thy pleasure's place like a buff-jerkin lasteth,
      For no buff-jerkin hath been oftener worn,
      Nor hath more scrapings or more dressings borne.

FOOTNOTES:

[471] Not in MS.




IN LIBRUM. IX.


    Liber doth vaunt how chastely he hath liv'd
    Since he hath been in town, seven years[472] and more,
    For that he swears he hath four only swiv'd,
    A maid, a wife, a widow, and a whore:
      Then, Liber, thou hast swiv'd all womenkind,
      For a fifth sort, I know, thou canst not find.

FOOTNOTES:

[472] MS. "knowen this towne 7 yeares."




IN MEDONTEM. X.


    Great Captain Medon wears a chain of gold
    Which at five hundred crowns is valud,
    For that it was his grandsire's chain of old,
    When great King Henry Boulogne conquerd.
    And wear it, Medon, for it may ensue,
    That thou, by virtue of this massy chain,
    A stronger town than Boulogne mayst subdue,
    If wise men's saws be not reputed vain;
    For what said Philip, king of Macedon?
    "There is no castle so well fortified,                            10
    But if an ass laden with gold comes on,
    The guard will stoop, and gates fly open wide."




IN GELAM. XI.


    Gella, if thou dost love thyself, take heed
    Lest thou my rhymes unto thy lover read;
    For straight thou grinn'st, and then thy lover seeth
    Thy canker-eaten gums and rotten teeth.




IN QUINTUM.[473] XII.


    Quintus his wit, infus'd into his brain,
    Mislikes the place, and fled into his feet;
    And there it wanders up and down the street,[474]
    Dabbled in the dirt, and soakd in the rain.
      Doubtless his wit intends not to aspire,
      Which leaves his head, to travel in the mire.

FOOTNOTES:

[473] Not in MS.

[474] Old eds. "streets."




IN SEVERUM. XIII.


    The puritan Severus oft doth read
    This text, that doth pronounce vain speech a sin,--
    "That thing defiles a man, that doth proceed
    From out the mouth, not that which enters in."
    Hence is it that we seldom hear him swear;
    And therefore like a Pharisee, he vaunts:
    But he devours more capons in a year
    Than would suffice a hundred protestants.
    And, sooth, those sectaries are gluttons all,
    As well the thread-bare cobbler as the knight;                    10
    For those poor slaves which have not wherewithal,
    Feed on the rich, till they devour them quite;
      And so, like Pharaoh's kine, they eat up clean
      Those that be fat, yet still themselves be lean.




IN LEUCAM. XIV.[475]


    Leuca in presence once a fart did let:
    Some laugh'd a little; she forsook the place;
    And, mad with shame, did eke her glove forget,
    Which she return'd to fetch with bashful grace;
      And when she would have said "this is[476] my glove,"
      "My fart," quod she; which did more laughter move.

FOOTNOTES:

[475] Not in MS.

[476] So Isham copy.--Other eds. omit the words "this is."




IN MACRUM. XV.


    Thou canst not speak yet, Macer; for to speak,
    Is to distinguish sounds significant:
    Thou with harsh noise the air dost rudely break;
    But what thou utter'st common sense doth want,--
      Half-English words, with fustian terms among,
      Much like the burden of a northern song.




IN FAUSTUM. XVI.


    "That youth," said Faustus, "hath a lion seen,
    Who from a dicing-house comes moneyless."
    But when he lost his hair, where had he been?
    I doubt me, he[477] had seen a lioness.

FOOTNOTES:

[477] So MS. and eds. B, C. Not in Isham copy or ed. A.




IN COSMUM. XVII.


    Cosmus hath more discoursing in his head
    Than Jove when Pallas issu'd from his brain;
    And still he strives to be deliverd
    Of all his thoughts at once; but all in vain;
    For, as we see at all the playhouse-doors,
    When ended is the play, the dance, and song,
    A thousand townsmen, gentlemen, and whores,
    Porters, and serving-men, together throng,--
    So thoughts of drinking, thriving, wenching, war,
    And borrowing money, ranging in his mind,                         10
    To issue all at once so forward are,
    As none at all can perfect passage find.




IN FLACCUM. XVIII.


    The false knave Flaccus once a bribe I gave;
    The more fool I to bribe so false a knave:
    But he gave back my bribe; the more fool he,
    That for my folly did not cozen me.




IN CINEAM. XIX.


    Thou, doggd Cineas, hated like a dog,
    For still thou grumblest like a masty[478] dog,
    Compar'st thyself to nothing but a dog;
    Thou say'st thou art as weary as a dog,
    As angry, sick, and hungry as a dog,
    As dull and melancholy as a dog,
    As lazy, sleepy, idle[479] as a dog.
    But why dost thou compare thee to a dog
    In that for which all men despise a dog?
    I will compare thee better to a dog;                              10
    Thou art as fair and comely as a dog,
    Thou art as true and honest as a dog,
    Thou art as kind and liberal as a dog,
    Thou art as wise and valiant as a dog.
    But, Cineas, I have often[480] heard thee tell,
    Thou art as like thy father as may be:
    'Tis like enough; and, faith, I like it well;
    But I am glad thou art not like to me.

FOOTNOTES:

[478] Mastiff.

[479] So Isham copy and MS.--Eds. A, B, C "and as idle."

[480] So MS.--Isham copy and ed. A "oft."




IN GERONTEM.[481] XX.


    Geron, whose[482] mouldy memory corrects
    Old Holinshed our famous chronicler
    With moral rules, and policy collects
    Out of all actions done these fourscore year;
    Accounts the time of every odd[483] event,
    Not from Christ's birth, nor from the prince's reign,
    But from some other famous accident,
    Which in men's general notice doth remain,--
    The siege of Boulogne,[484] and the plaguy sweat,[485]
    The going to Saint Quintin's[486] and New-Haven,[487]             10
    The rising[488] in the north, the frost so great,
    That cart-wheel prints on Thamis' face were graven,[489]
    The fall of money,[490] and burning of Paul's steeple,[491]
    The blazing star,[492] and Spaniards' overthrow:[493]
    By these events, notorious to the people,
    He measures times, and things forepast doth show:
    But most of all, he chiefly reckons by
    A private chance,--the death of his curst[494] wife;
    This is to him the dearest memory,
    And th' happiest accident of all his life.                        20

FOOTNOTES:

[481] Not in MS.

[482] So Isham copy.--Omitted in ed. A.

[483] So Isham copy.--Eds. A, B, C "old."

[484] Boulogne was captured by Henry VIII. in 1544.

[485] The reference probably is to the visitation of 1551.

[486] In 1557 an English corps under the Earl of Pembroke took part in
the war against France. "The English did not share in the glory of the
battle, for they were not present; but they arrived two days after to
take part in the storming of St. Quentin, and to share, to their shame,
in the sack and spoiling of the town."--Froude, VI. 52.

[487] Havre.--The expedition was despatched in 1562.

[488] Led by the Earls of Northumberland and Westmoreland in 1569.

[489] The reference is to the frost of 1564.--"There was one great frost
in England in our memory, and that was in the 7th year of Queen
Elizabeth: which began upon the 21st of December and held in so
extremely that, upon New Year's eve following, people in multitudes went
upon the Thames from London Bridge to Westminster; some, as you tell me,
sir, they do now--playing at football, others shooting at pricks."--"The
Great Frost," 1608 (Arber's "English Garner," Vol. I.)

[490] "This yeare [1560] in the end of September the copper monies which
had been coyned under King Henry the Eight and once before abased by
King Edward the Sixth, were again brought to a lower
valuacion."--Hayward's _Annals of Queen Elizabeth_, p. 73.

[491] On the 4th June 1561, the steeple of St. Paul's was struck by
lightning.

[492] "On the 10th of October (some say on the 7th) appeared a blazing
star in the north, bushing towards the east, which was nightly seen
diminishing of his brightness until the 21st of the same month."--Stow's
_Annales_, under the year 1580 (ed. 1615, p. 687).

[493] The defeat of the Spanish Armada in 1588.

[494] Vixenish.




IN MARCUM. XXI.


    When Marcus comes from Mins',[495] he still doth swear,
    By "come[496] on seven," that all is lost and gone:
    But that's not true; for he hath lost his hair,
    Only for that he came too much on[497] one.

FOOTNOTES:

[495] Dyce conjectures that this was the name of some person who kept an
ordinary where gaming was practised. (MS. "for newes.")

[496] So eds. B, C.--Isham copy and ed. A "a seaven."

[497] So MS. with some eccentricities of spelling ("to much one
one").--Old eds. "at."




IN CYPRIUM. XXII.


    The fine youth Cyprius is more terse and neat
    Than the new garden of the Old Temple is;
    And still the newest fashion he doth get,
    And with the time doth change from that to this;
    He wears a hat now of the flat-crown block,[498]
    The treble ruff,[499] long coat, and doublet French:
    He takes tobacco, and doth wear a lock,[500]
    And wastes more time in dressing than a wench.
      Yet this new-fangled youth, made for these times,
      Doth, above all, praise old George[501] Gascoigne's rhymes.[502]  10

FOOTNOTES:

[498] Shape or fashion; properly the wooden mould on which the crown of
a hat is shaped.

[499] So MS.--Old eds. "ruffes."

[500] Love-lock; a lock of hair hanging down the shoulder in the left
side. It was usually plaited with ribands.

[501] So MS. and eds. B, C.--Not in Isham copy or ed. A.

[502] Gascoigne's "rhymes" have been edited in two thick volumes by Mr.
Carew Hazlitt. He died on 7th October 1577. In Gabriel Harvey's _Letter
Book_ (recently edited by Mr. Edward Scott for the Camden Society) there
are some elegies on him.




IN CINEAM. XXIII.


    When Cineas comes amongst his friends in morning,
    He slyly looks[503] who first his cap doth move:
    Him he salutes, the rest so grimly scorning,
    As if for ever they had lost his love.
    I, knowing how it doth the humour fit
    Of this fond gull to be saluted first,
    Catch at my cap, but move it not a whit:
    Which he perceiving,[504] seems for spite to burst.
    But, Cineas, why expect you more of me
    Than I of you? I am as good a man,                                10
    And better too by many a quality,
    For vault, and dance, and fence, and rhyme I can:
      You keep a whore at your own charge, men tell me;
      Indeed, friend Cineas, therein you excel me.[505]

FOOTNOTES:

[503] So Isham copy and ed. A.--Eds. B, C "spies."--MS. "notes."

[504] So the MS.--Isham copy and ed. A "Which perceiving he."--Eds. B, C
"Which to perceiving he."

[505] The MS. adds--

    "You keepe a whore att your [own] charge in towne;
    Indeede, frend Ceneas, there you put me downe."




IN GALLUM. XXIV.


    Gallus hath been this summer-time in Friesland,
    And now, return'd, he speaks such warlike words,
    As, if I could their English understand,
    I fear me they would cut my throat like swords;
    He talks of counter-scarfs,[506] and casamates,[507]
    Of parapets, curtains, and palisadoes;[508]
    Of flankers, ravelins, gabions he prates,
    And of false-brays,[509] and sallies, and scaladoes.[510]
    But, to requite such gulling terms as these,
    With words to my profession I reply;                              10
    I tell of fourching, vouchers, and counterpleas,
    Of withernams, essoins, and champarty.
      So, neither of us understanding either,
      We part as wise as when we came together.

FOOTNOTES:

[506] Counter-scarps.

[507] Old eds. "Casomates."

[508] Old eds. "Of parapets, of curteneys, and pallizadois."--MS. "Of
parapelets, curtens and passadoes."--Cunningham prints "Of curtains,
parapets," &c.

[509] "A term in fortification, exactly from the French _fausse-braie_,
which means, say the dictionaries, a counter-breast-work, or, in fact, a
mound thrown up to mask some part of the works.

    'And made those strange approaches by false-brays,
    Reduits, half-moons, horn-works, and such close ways.'

_B. Jons. Underwoods._"--Nares.

[510] Dyce points out that this passage is imitated in Fitzgeoffrey's
_Notes from Black-Fryers_, Sig. E. 7, ed. 1620.




IN DECIUM.[511] XXV.


    Audacious painters have Nine Worthies made;
    But poet Decius, more audacious far,
    Making his mistress march with men of war,
    With title of "Tenth Worthy" doth her lade.
      Methinks that gull did use his terms as fit,
      Which term'd his love "a giant for her wit."

FOOTNOTES:

[511] In this epigram, as Dyce showed, Davies is glancing at a sonnet of
Drayton's "To the Celestiall Numbers" in _Idea_. Jonson told Drummond
that "S. J. Davies played in ane Epigrame on Draton's, who in a sonnet
concluded his mistress might been the Ninth [sic] Worthy; and said he
used a phrase like Dametas in Arcadia, who said, For wit his Mistresse
might be a Gyant."--_Notes of Ben Jonson's Conversations with Drummond_,
p. 15. (ed. Shakesp. Soc.)




IN GELLAM. XXVI.


    If Gella's beauty be examind,
    She hath a dull dead eye, a saddle nose,
    An ill-shap'd face, with morphew overspread,
    And rotten teeth, which she in laughing shows;
    Briefly, she is the filthiest wench in town,
    Of all that do the art of whoring use:
    But when she hath put on her satin gown,
    Her cut[512] lawn apron, and her velvet shoes,
    Her green silk stockings, and her petticoat
    Of taffeta, with golden fringe around,                            10
    And is withal perfum'd with civet hot,
    Which doth her valiant stinking breath confound,--
      Yet she with these additions is no more
      Than a sweet, filthy, fine, ill-favour'd whore.

FOOTNOTES:

[512] So MS.--Old eds. "out."




IN SYLLAM. XXVII.


    Sylla is often challeng'd to the field,
    To answer, like a gentleman, his foes:
    But then doth he this[513] only answer yield,
    That he hath livings and fair lands to lose.
      Sylla, if none but beggars valiant were,
      The king of Spain would put us all in fear.

FOOTNOTES:

[513] So Isham copy.--Ed. A "when doth he his."




IN SYLLAM. XXVIII.


    Who dares affirm that Sylla dare not fight?
    When I dare swear he dares adventure more
    Than the most brave and most[514] all-daring wight
    That ever arms with resolution bore;
    He that dare touch the most unwholesome whore
    That ever was retir'd into the spittle,
    And dares court wenches standing at a door
    (The portion of his wit being passing little);
    He that dares give his dearest friends offences,
    Which other valiant fools do fear to do,                          10
    And, when a fever doth confound his senses,
    Dare eat raw beef, and drink strong wine thereto:
    He that dares take tobacco on the stage,[515]
    Dares man a whore at noon-day through the street,
    Dares dance in Paul's, and in this formal age
    Dares say and do whatever is unmeet;
      Whom fear of shame could never yet affright,
      Who dares affirm that Sylla dares not fight?

FOOTNOTES:

[514] So Isham copy.--Ed. A "most brave, most all daring."--Eds. B, C
"most brave and all daring."--MS. "most valiant and all-daring."

[515] There are frequent allusions to this practice. Cf. Induction to
_Cynthia's Revels_:--"I have my three sorts of tobacco in my pocket; my
light by me."




IN HEYWODUM. XXIX.


    Heywood,[516] that did in epigrams excel,
    Is now put down since my light Muse arose;[517]
    As buckets are put down into a well,
    Or as a schoolboy putteth down his hose.

FOOTNOTES:

[516] John Heywood, the well-known epigrammatist and interlude-writer.
His Proverbs were edited in 1874, with a pleasantly-written Introduction
and useful notes, by Mr. Julian Sharman.

[517] Dyce refers to a passage of Sir John Harington's _Metamorphosis of
Ajax_, 1596:--"This Haywood for his proverbs and epigrams is not yet put
down by any of our country, though one [marginal note, M. Davies] doth
indeed come near him, that graces him the more in saying he puts him
down." He quotes also from Bastard's _Chrestoleros_, 1598 (Lib. ii. Ep.
15); Lib. iii. Ep. 3, and Freeman's _Rubbe and a Great Cast_ ( Pt. ii.,
Ep. 100), allusions to the present epigram.




IN DACUM.[518] XXX.


    Amongst the poets Dacus number'd is,
    Yet could he never make an English rhyme:
    But some prose speeches I have heard of his,
    Which have been spoken many a hundred time;
    The man that keeps the elephant hath one,
    Wherein he tells the wonders of the beast;
    Another Banks pronouncd long agone,
    When he his curtal's[519] qualities express'd:
    He first taught him that keeps the monuments
    At Westminster, his formal tale to say,                           10
    And also him which puppets represents,
    And also him which with the ape doth play.
      Though all his poetry be like to this,
      Amongst the poets Dacus number'd is.

FOOTNOTES:

[518] Samuel Daniel. See Ep. xlv.

[519] All the information about Banks' wonderful horse Moroccus ("the
little horse that ambled on the top of Paul's") is collected in Mr.
Halliwell-Phillips' _Memoranda on Love's Labour Lost_.




IN PRISCUM. XXXI.


    When Priscus, rais'd from low to high estate,
    Rode through the street in pompous jollity,
    Caius, his poor familiar friend of late,
    Bespake him thus, "Sir, now you know not me,"
      "'Tis likely, friend," quoth Priscus, "to be so,
      For at this time myself I do not know."




IN BRUNUM. XXXII.


    Brunus, which deems[520] himself a fair sweet youth,
    Is nine and thirty[521] year of age at least;
    Yet was he never, to confess the truth,
    But a dry starveling when he was at best.
    This gull was sick to show his nightcap fine,
    And his wrought pillow overspread with lawn;
    But hath been well since his grief's cause hath line[522]
    At Trollop's by Saint Clement's Church in pawn.

FOOTNOTES:

[520] So eds. B, C.--Isham copy and ed. A "thinks."

[521] Old eds. "thirtie nine." MS. "nine and thirtith."

[522] Lain.




IN FRANCUM. XXXIII.


    When Francus comes to solace with his whore,
    He sends for rods, and strips himself stark naked;
    For his lust sleeps, and will not rise before,
    By whipping of the wench, it be awakd.
      I envy him not, but wish I[523] had the power
      To make myself his wench but one half-hour.

FOOTNOTES:

[523] So Isham copy.--Ed. A "he."




IN CASTOREM. XXXIV.


    Of speaking well why do we learn the skill,
    Hoping thereby honour and wealth to gain?
    Sith railing Castor doth, by speaking ill,
    Opinion of much wit, and gold obtain.




IN SEPTIMIUM. XXXV.


    Septimius[524] lives, and is like garlic seen,
    For though his head be white, his blade is green.
    This old mad colt deserves a martyr's praise,
    For he was burnd[525] in Queen Mary's days.

FOOTNOTES:

[524] So ed. B.--Isham copy, ed. A, and MS. "Septimus."

[525] "Burn" is often used with an indelicate _double entendre_. Cf.
_Lear_ iii. 2, "No heretics _burned_ but wenchers' suitors;" _Troilus
and Cressida_, v. 2, "A _burning_ devil take them."




OF TOBACCO. XXXVI.


    Homer of Moly and Nepenthe sings;
    Moly, the gods' most sovereign herb divine,
    Nepenthe, Helen's[526] drink, which gladness brings,
    Heart's grief expels, and doth the wit refine.
    But this our age another world hath found,
    From whence an herb of heavenly power is brought;
    Moly is not so sovereign for a wound,
    Nor hath nepenthe so great wonders wrought.
    It is tobacco, whose sweet subtle[527] fume
    The hellish torment of the teeth doth ease,                       10
    By drawing down and drying up the rheum,
    The mother and the nurse of each disease;
    It is tobacco, which doth cold expel,
    And clears th' obstructions of the arteries,
    And surfeits threatening death digesteth well,
    Decocting all the stomach's crudities;[528]
    It is tobacco, which hath power to clarify
    The cloudy mists before dim eyes appearing;
    It is tobacco, which hath power to rarify
    The thick gross humour which doth stop the hearing;               20
    The wasting hectic, and the quartan fever,
    Which doth of physic make a mockery,
    The gout it cures, and helps ill breaths for ever,
    Whether the cause in teeth or stomach be;
    And though ill breaths were by it but confounded,
    Yet that vild[529] medicine it doth far excel,
    Which by Sir Thomas More[530] hath been propounded,
    For this is thought a gentleman-like smell.
    O, that I were one of these mountebanks
    Which praise their oils and powders which they sell!              30
    My customers would give me coin with thanks;
    I for this ware, forsooth,[531] a tale would tell:
    Yet would I use none of these terms before;
    I would but say, that it the pox will cure;
    This were enough, without discoursing more,
    All our brave gallants in the town t'allure.

FOOTNOTES:

[526] Isham copy, "Heuens;" and eds. B, C "Heauens."--MS.
"helevs."--Davies alludes to _Odyssey_ iv., 219, &c.

[527] So MS.--Old eds. "substantiall."

[528] We are reminded of Bobadil's encomium of tobacco:--"I could say
what I know of the virtue of it, for the expulsion of rheums, raw
humours, crudities, obstructions, with a thousand of this kind; but I
profess myself no quacksalver. Only this much: by Hercules I do hold it
and will affirm it before any prince in Europe to be the most sovereign
and precious weed that ever the earth tendered to the use of man."

[529] So MS.--Not in old eds.

[530] Dyce quotes from More's _Lucubrationes_ (ed. 1563, p. 261), an
epigram headed "Medicin ad tollendos foetores anhelitus, provenientes
a cibis quibusdam."

[531] So eds. A, B, C.--Isham copy "so smooth."--MS. "so faire."




IN CRASSUM. XXXVII.


    Crassus his lies are no[532] pernicious lies,
    But pleasant fictions, hurtful unto none
    But to himself; for no man counts him wise
    To tell for truth that which for false is known.
    He swears that Gaunt[533] is three-score miles about,
    And that the bridge at Paris[534] on the Seine
    Is of such thickness, length, and breadth throughout,
    That six-score arches can it scarce sustain;
    He swears he saw so great a dead man's skull
    At Canterbury digg'd out of the ground,                           10
    As[535] would contain of wheat three bushels full;
    And that in Kent are twenty yeomen found,
    Of which the poorest every year[536] dispends
    Five thousand pound: these and five thousand mo
    So oft he hath recited to his friends,
    That now himself persuades himself 'tis so.
    But why doth Crassus tell his lies so rife,
    Of bridges, towns, and things that have no life?
      He is a lawyer, and doth well espy
      That for such lies an action will not lie.                      20

FOOTNOTES:

[532] So MS.--Eds. "not."

[533] Ghent.

[534] The reference probably is to the Pont Neuf, begun by Henry III.
and finished by Henry IV.

[535] So MS.--Old eds. "That."

[536] MS. "day!"




IN PHILONEM. XXXVIII.


    Philo, the lawyer,[537] and the fortune-teller,
    The school-master, the midwife,[538] and the bawd,
    The conjurer, the buyer and the seller
    Of painting which with breathing will be thaw'd,
    Doth practise physic; and his credit grows,
    As doth the ballad-singer's auditory,
    Which hath at Temple-Bar his standing chose,
    And to the vulgar sings an ale-house story:
    First stands a porter; then an oyster-wife
    Doth stint her cry and stay her steps to hear him;                10
    Then comes a cutpurse ready with his[539] knife,
    And then a country client presseth[540] near him;
    There stands the constable, there stands the whore,
    And, hearkening[541] to the song, mark[542] not each other;
    There by the serjeant stands the debitor,[543]
    And doth no more mistrust him than his brother:
    This[544] Orpheus to such hearers giveth music,
    And Philo to such patients giveth physic.

FOOTNOTES:

[537] Isham copy and MS. "gentleman."

[538] MS. "widdow."

[539] So Isham copy and MS.--Other eds. "a."

[540] So Isham copy.--Other eds. "passeth."--MS. "presses."

[541] So Isham copy, ed. A, and MS.--Eds. B, C "listening."

[542] So Isham copy, ed. A, and MS.--Eds. B, C "heed."

[543] So eds. B, C.--Isham copy, MS., and ed. A, "debtor poor."--With
the foregoing description of the "ballad-singer's auditory" compare
Wordsworth's lines _On the power of Music_, and Vincent Bourne's
charming Latin verses (entitled _Cantatrices_) on the Ballad Singers of
the Seven Dials.

[544] So MS.--Eds. "Thus."




IN FUSCUM. XXXIX.


    Fuscus is free, and hath the world at will;
    Yet, in the course of life that he doth lead,
    He's like a horse which, turning round a mill,
    Doth always in the self-same circle tread:
    First, he doth rise at ten;[545] and at eleven
    He goes to Gill's, where he doth eat till one;
    Then sees a play till six;[546] and sups at seven;
    And, after supper, straight to bed is gone;
    And there till ten next day he doth remain;
    And then he dines; then sees a comedy;                            10
    And then he sups, and goes to bed again:
    Thus round he runs without variety,
      Save that sometimes he comes not to the play,
      But falls into a whore-house by the way.

FOOTNOTES:

[545] Cf. a somewhat similar description in Guilpin's _Skialetheia_ (Ep.
25):--

    "My lord most court-like lies abed till noon,
    Then all high-stomacht riseth to his dinner;
    Falls straight to dice before his meat be down,
    Or to digest walks to some female sinner;
    Perhaps fore-tired he gets him to a play,
    Comes home to supper and then falls to dice;
    Then his devotion wakes till it be day,
    And so to bed where unto noon he lies."

[546] If the play ended at six, it could hardly have begun before three.
From numerous passages it appears that performances frequently began at
three, or even later. Probably the curtain rose at one in the winter and
three in the summer.




IN AFRUM. XL.


    The smell-feast[547] Afer travels to the Burse
    Twice every day, the flying news to hear;
    Which, when he hath no money in his purse,
    To rich men's tables he doth ever[548] bear.
    He tells how Groni[n]gen[549] is taken in[550]
    By the brave conduct of illustrious Vere,
    And how the Spanish forces Brest would win,
    But that they do victorious Norris[551] fear.
    No sooner is a ship at sea surpris'd,
    But straight he learns the news, and doth disclose it;
    No[552] sooner hath the Turk a plot devis'd
    To conquer Christendom, but straight he knows it.
    Fair-written in a scroll he hath the names
    Of all the widows which the plague hath made;
    And persons, times, and places, still he frames
    To every tale, the better to persuade.
    We call him Fame, for that the wide-mouth slave
    Will eat as fast as he will utter lies;                           20
    For fame is said an hundred mouths to have,
    And he eats more than would five-score suffice.

FOOTNOTES:

[547] This word is found in Chapman, Harrington, and others.

[548] So MS.--Old eds. "often."

[549] Groningen was taken by Maurice of Nassau. Vere was present at the
siege.

[550] The expression "take in" (in the sense of "conquer, capture") is
very common.

[551] An English expedition, under Sir John Norris, was sent to Brittany
in 1594.

[552] This line and the next are found only in Isham copy and MS.




IN PAULUM. XLI.


    By lawful mart, and by unlawful stealth,
    Paulus, in spite of envy, fortunate,
    Derives out of the ocean so much wealth,
    As he may well maintain a lord's estate:
      But on the land a little gulf there is,
      Wherein he drowneth all this[553] wealth of his.

FOOTNOTES:

[553] So Isham copy--Eds. A, B, C "the."--MS. "ye."




IN LYCUM. XLII.


    Lycus, which lately is to Venice gone,
    Shall, if he do return, gain three for one;[554]
    But, ten to one, his knowledge and his wit
    Will not be better'd or increas'd a whit.

FOOTNOTES:

[554] When a person started on a long or dangerous voyage it was
customary to deposit--or, as it was called, "put out"--a sum of money,
on condition of receiving at his return a high rate of interest. If he
failed to return the money was lost. There are frequent allusions in old
authors to this practice.




IN PUBLIUM. XLIII.


    Publius, a[555] student at the Common-Law,
    Oft leaves his books, and, for his recreation,
    To Paris-garden[556] doth himself withdraw;
    Where he is ravish'd with such delectation,
    As down amongst the bears and dogs he goes;
    Where, whilst he skipping cries, "To head, to head,"[557]
    His satin doublet and his velvet hose
    Are all with spittle from above be-spread;
    Then is he like his father's country hall,
    Stinking of dogs, and muted[558] all with hawks;                  10
    And rightly too on him this filth doth fall,
    Which for such filthy sports his books forsakes,
      Leaving old Ployden, Dyer, and Brooke alone,
      To see old Harry Hunkes and Sacarson.[559]

FOOTNOTES:

[555] So MS.--Not in old eds.

[556] The Bear-Garden in the Bankside, Southwark.

[557] In _Titus Andronicus_, v. 1, we have the expression "to fight at
head" ("As true a dog as ever fought _at head_"). "To fly at the head"
was equivalent to "attack;" and in Nares' _Glossary_ (ed. Halliwell) the
expression "run on head," in the sense of incite, is quoted from
Heywood's _Spider and Flie_, 1556.

[558] Covered with hawks' dung.

[559] "Harry Hunkes" and "Sacarson" were the names of two famous bears
(probably named after their keepers). Slender boasted to Anne Page, "I
have seen Sackarson loose twenty times and have taken him by the chain."




IN SYLLAM. XLIV.


    When I this proposition had defended,
    "A coward cannot be an honest man,"
    Thou, Sylla, seem'st forthwith to be offended,
    And hold'st[560] the contrary, and swear'st[561] he can.
    But when I tell thee that he will forsake
    His dearest friend in peril of his life,
    Thou then art chang'd, and say'st thou didst mistake;
    And so we end our argument and strife:
      Yet I think oft, and think I think aright,
      Thy argument argues thou wilt not fight.                        10

FOOTNOTES:

[560] So MS.--Old eds. "holds."

[561] So MS.--Old eds. "swears."




IN DACUM. XLV.


    Dacus,[562] with some good colour and pretence,
    Terms his love's beauty "silent eloquence;"
    For she doth lay more colours on her face
    Than ever Tully us'd his speech to grace.

FOOTNOTES:

[562] Dyce shows that Samuel Daniel is meant by Dacus (who has already
been ridiculed in _Ep._ xxx.). In Daniel's _Complaint of Rosamond_
(1592) are the lines:--

    "Ah, beauty, syren, faire enchanting good,
    Sweet _silent rhetorique_ of perswading eyes,
    _Dumb eloquence_, whose power doth move the blood
    More than the words or wisedome of the wise," &c.

Perhaps there is an allusion to this epigram in Marston's fourth
satire:--

    "What, shall not Rosamond or Gaveston
    Ope their sweet lips without detraction?
    But must our modern critticks envious eye
    Seeme thus to quote some grosse deformity,
    Where art not error shineth in their stile,
    But error and no art doth thee beguile?"




IN MARCUM. XLVI.


    Why dost thou, Marcus, in thy misery
    Rail and blaspheme, and call the heavens unkind?
    The heavens do owe[563] no kindness unto thee,
    Thou hast the heavens so little in thy mind;
      For in thy life thou never usest prayer
      But at primero, to encounter fair.

FOOTNOTES:

[563] So eds. B, C.--Ed. A "draw" (Epigram xlv.-xlviii. are not in the
MS.)




MEDITATIONS OF A GULL. XLVII.


    See, yonder melancholy gentleman,
    Which, hood-wink'd with his hat, alone doth sit!
    Think what he thinks, and tell me, if you can,
    What great affairs trouble his little wit.
    He thinks not of the war 'twixt France and Spain,[564]
    Whether it be for Europe's good or ill,
    Nor whether the Empire can itself maintain
    Against the Turkish power encroaching still;[565]
    Nor what great town in all the Netherlands
    The States determine to besiege this spring,                      10
    Nor how the Scottish policy now stands,
    Nor what becomes of the Irish mutining.[566]
    But he doth seriously bethink him whether
    Of the gull'd people he be more esteem'd
    For his long cloak or for[567] his great black feather
    By which each gull is now a gallant deem'd;
    Or of a journey he deliberates
    To Paris-garden, Cock-pit, or the play;
    Or how to steal a dog he meditates,
    Or what he shall unto his mistress say.
      Yet with these thoughts he thinks himself most fit
      To be of counsel with a king for wit.

FOOTNOTES:

[564] Ended in 1598 by the peace of Vervins.

[565] The war between Austria and Turkey was brought to a close in 1606.

[566] A reference to Tyrone's insurrection, 1595-1602.

[567] So Isham copy.--Not in other eds.




AD MUSAM. XLVIII.


    Peace, idle Muse, have done! for it is time,
    Since lousy Ponticus envies my fame,
    And swears the better sort are much to blame
    To make me so well known for my ill rhyme.
    Yet Banks his horse[568] is better known than he;
    So are the camels and the western hog,
    And so is Lepidus his printed dog[569]:
    Why doth not Ponticus their fames envy?
    Besides, this Muse of mine and the black feather
    Grew both together fresh in estimation;                           10
    And both, grown stale, were cast away together:
    What fame is this that scarce lasts out a fashion?
    Only this last in credit doth remain,
    That from henceforth each bastard cast-forth rhyme,
    Which doth but savour of a libel vein,
    Shall call me father, and be thought my crime;
      So dull, and with so little sense endued,
      Is my gross-headed judge the multitude.

J. D.

FOOTNOTES:

[568] See note, p. 232.

[569] Dyce points out that by Lepidus is meant Sir John Harington, whose
dog Bungey is represented in a compartment of the engraved title-page of
the translation of _Orlando Furioso_, 1591. In his epigrams (Book III.
Ep. 21) Harington refers to this epigram of Davies, and expresses
himself greatly pleased at the compliment paid to his dog.




IGNOTO.


    I[570] love thee not for sacred chastity,--
    Who loves for that?--nor for thy sprightly wit;
    I love thee not for thy sweet modesty,
    Which makes thee in perfection's throne to sit;
    I love thee not for thy enchanting eye,
    Thy beauty['s] ravishing perfection;
    I love thee not for unchaste luxury,
    Nor for thy body's fair proportion;
    I love thee not for that my soul doth dance
    And leap with pleasure, when those lips of thine
    Give musical and graceful utterance
    To some (by thee made happy) poet's line;
    I love thee not for voice or slender small:
    But wilt thou know wherefore? fair sweet, for all.

    Faith, wench, I cannot court thy sprightly eyes,
    With the base-viol plac'd between my thighs;
    I cannot lisp, nor to some fiddle sing,
    Nor run upon a high-stretch'd minikin;
    I cannot whine in puling elegies,
    Entombing Cupid with sad obsequies;
    I am not fashion'd for these amorous times,
    To court thy beauty with lascivious rhymes;
    I cannot dally, caper, dance, and sing,
    Oiling my saint with supple sonneting;
    I cannot cross my arms, or sigh "Ay me,
    Ay me, forlorn!" egregious foppery!
    I cannot buss thy fist,[571] play with thy hair,
    Swearing by Jove, "thou art most debonair!"
    Not I, by cock! but [I] shall tell thee roundly,--
    Hark in thine ear,--zounds, I can (----) thee soundly.

    Sweet wench, I love thee: yet I will not sue,
    Or show my love as musky courtiers do;
    I'll not carouse a health to honour thee,
    In this same bezzling[572] drunken courtesy,
    And, when all's quaff'd, eat up my bousing-glass[573]
    In glory that I am thy servile ass;
    Nor will I wear a rotten Bourbon lock,[574]
    As some sworn peasant to a female smock.
    Well-featur'd lass, thou know'st I love thee dear:
    Yet for thy sake I will not bore mine ear,
    To hang thy dirty silken shoe-tires there;
    Nor for thy love will I once gnash a brick,
    Or some pied colours in my bonnet stick:[575]
    But, by the chaps of hell, to do thee good,
    I'll freely spend my thrice-decocted blood.

FOOTNOTES:

[570] This sonnet and the two following pieces are only found in Isham
copy and ed. A.

[571] So Isham copy.--Ed. A "fill."

[572] Tippling.

[573] "Bouse" was a cant term for "drink."

[574] See note v. p. 226.

[575] It was a common practice for gallants to wear their mistresses'
garters in their hats.




THE FIRST BOOK OF LUCAN.


_Lucans First Booke Translated Line for Line, By Chr. Marlow. At London,
Printed by P. Short, and are to be sold by Walter Burre at the Signe of
the Flower de Luce in Paules Churchyard_, 1600, 4_to._

This is the only early edition. The title-page of the 1600 4to. of _Hero
and Leander_ has the words, "Whereunto is added the first booke of
Lucan;" but the two pieces are not found in conjunction.




TO HIS KIND AND TRUE FRIEND, EDWARD BLUNT.[576]


Blunt,[577] I propose to be blunt with you, and, out of my dulness, to
encounter you with a Dedication in memory of that pure elemental wit,
Chr. Marlowe, whose ghost or genius is to be seen walk the
Churchyard,[578] in, at the least, three or four sheets. Methinks you
should presently look wild now, and grow humorously frantic upon the
taste of it. Well, lest you should, let me tell you, this spirit was
sometime a familiar of your own, _Lucan's First Book translated_; which,
in regard of your old right in it, I have raised in the circle of your
patronage. But stay now, Edward: if I mistake not, you are to
accommodate yourself with some few instructions, touching the property
of a patron, that you are not yet possessed of; and to study them for
your better grace, as our gallants do fashions. First, you must be
proud, and think you have merit enough in you, though you are ne'er so
empty; then, when I bring you the book, take physic, and keep state;
assign me a time by your man to come again; and, afore the day, be sure
to have changed your lodging; in the meantime sleep little, and sweat
with the invention of some pitiful dry jest or two, which you may happen
to utter with some little, or not at all, marking of your friends, when
you have found a place for them to come in at; or, if by chance
something has dropped from you worth the taking up, weary all that come
to you with the often repetition of it; censure, scornfully enough, and
somewhat like a traveller; commend nothing, lest you discredit your
(that which you would seem to have) judgment. These things, if you can
mould yourself to them, Ned, I make no question that they will not
become you. One special virtue in our patrons of these days I have
promised myself you shall fit excellently, which is, to give nothing;
yes, thy love I will challenge as my peculiar object, both in this, and,
I hope, many more succeeding offices. Farewell: I affect not the world
should measure my thoughts to thee by a scale of this nature: leave to
think good of me when I fall from thee.

Thine in all rights of perfect friendship,

                                   THOMAS THORPE.

FOOTNOTES:

[576] A well-known bookseller.

[577] Old ed. "Blount."

[578] Paul's churchyard, the Elizabethan "Booksellers' Row."




THE FIRST BOOK OF LUCAN.


    Wars worse than civil on Thessalian plains,
    And outrage strangling law, and people strong,
    We sing, whose conquering swords their own breasts lancht,[579]
    Armies allied, the kingdom's league uprooted,
    Th' affrighted world's force bent on public spoil,
    Trumpets and drums, like[580] deadly, threatening other,
    Eagles alike display'd, darts answering darts,
      Romans, what madness, what huge lust of war,
    Hath made barbarians drunk with Latin blood?
    Now Babylon, proud through our spoil, should stoop,               10
    While slaughter'd Crassus' ghost walks unreveng'd,
    Will ye wage war, for which you shall not triumph?
    Ay me! O, what a world of land and sea
    Might they have won whom civil broils have slain!
    As far as Titan springs, where night dims heaven,
    I, to the torrid zone where mid-day burns,
    And where stiff winter, whom no spring resolves,
    Fetters the Euxine Sea with chains of ice;
    Scythia and wild Armenia had been yok'd,
    And they of Nilus' mouth, if there live any.                      20
    Rome, if thou take delight in impious war,
    First conquer all the earth, then turn thy force
    Against thyself: as yet thou wants not foes.
    That now the walls of houses half-reared totter,
    That, rampires fallen down, huge heaps of stone
    Lie in our towns, that houses are abandon'd,
    And few live that behold their ancient seats;
    Italy many years hath lien untill'd
    And chok'd with thorns; that greedy earth wants hinds;--
    Fierce Pyrrhus, neither thou nor Hannibal                         30
    Art cause; no foreign foe could so afflict us:
    These plagues arise from wreak of civil power.
    But if for Nero, then unborn, the Fates
    Would find no other means, and gods not slightly
    Purchase immortal thrones, nor Jove joy'd heaven
    Until the cruel giants' war was done;
    We plain not, heavens, but gladly bear these evils
    For Nero's sake: Pharsalia groan with slaughter,
    And Carthage souls be glutted with our bloods!
    At Munda let the dreadful battles join;                           40
    Add, Csar, to these ills, Perusian famine,
    The Mutin toils, the fleet at Luca[s] sunk,
    And cruel[581] field near burning tna fought!
    Yet Rome is much bound to these civil arms,
    Which made thee emperor. Thee (seeing thou, being old,
    Must shine a star) shall heaven (whom thou lovest)
    Receive with shouts; where thou wilt reign as king,
    Or mount the Sun's flame-bearing chariot,
    And with bright restless fire compass the earth,
    Undaunted though her former guide be chang'd;                     50
    Nature and every power shall give thee place,
    What god it please thee be, or where to sway.
    But neither choose the north t'erect thy seat,
    Nor yet the adverse reeking[582] southern pole,
    Whence thou shouldst view thy Rome with squinting[583] beams.
    If any one part of vast heaven thou swayest,
    The burden'd axes[584] with thy force will bend:
    The midst is best; that place is pure and bright;
    There, Csar, mayst thou shine, and no cloud dim thee.
    Then men from war shall bide in league and ease,                  60
    Peace through the world from Janus' face shall fly,
    And bolt the brazen gates with bars of iron.
    Thou, Csar, at this instant art my god;
    Thee if I invocate, I shall not need
    To crave Apollo's aid or Bacchus' help;
    Thy power inspires the Muse that sings this war.
      The causes first I purpose to unfold
    Of these garboils,[585] whence springs a long discourse;
    And what made madding people shake off peace.
    The Fates are envious, high seats[586] quickly perish,            70
    Under great burdens falls are ever grievous;
    Rome was so great it could not bear itself.
    So when this world's compounded union breaks,
    Time ends, and to old Chaos all things turn,
    Confused stars shall meet, celestial fire
    Fleet on the floods, the earth shoulder the sea,
    Affording it no shore, and Phoebe's wain
    Chase Phoebus, and enrag'd affect his place,
    And strive to shine by day and full of strife
    Dissolve the engines of the broken world.                         80
    All great things crush themselves; such end the gods
    Allot the height of honour; men so strong
    By land and sea, no foreign force could ruin.
    O Rome, thyself art cause of all these evils,
    Thyself thus shiver'd out to three men's shares!
    Dire league of partners in a kingdom last not.
    O faintly-join'd friends, with ambition blind,
    Why join you force to share the world betwixt you?
    While th' earth the sea, and air the earth sustains,
    While Titan strives against the world's swift course,             90
    Or Cynthia, night's queen, waits upon the day,
    Shall never faith be found in fellow kings:
    Dominion cannot suffer partnership.
    This need[s] no foreign proof nor far-fet[587] story:
    Rome's infant walls were steep'd in brother's blood;
    Nor then was land or sea, to breed such hate;
    A town with one poor church set them at odds.[588]
      Csar's and Pompey's jarring love soon ended,
    'Twas peace against their wills; betwixt them both
    Stepp'd Crassus in. Even as the slender isthmos,                 100
    Betwixt the gan,[589] and the Ionian sea,
    Keeps each from other, but being worn away,
    They both burst out, and each encounter other;
    So whenas Crassus' wretched death, who stay'd them,
    Had fill'd Assyrian Carra's[590] walls with blood,
    His loss made way for Roman outrages.
    Parthians, y'afflict us more than ye suppose;
    Being conquer'd, we are plagu'd with civil war.
    Swords share our empire: Fortune, that made Rome
    Govern the earth, the sea, the world itself,                     110
    Would not admit two lords; for Julia,
    Snatch'd hence by cruel Fates, with ominous howls
    Bare down to hell her son, the pledge of peace,
    And all bands of that death-presaging allince.
    Julia, had heaven given thee longer life,
    Thou hadst restrain'd thy headstrong husband's rage,
    Yea, and thy father too, and, swords thrown down,
    Made all shake hands, as once the Sabines did:
    Thy death broke amity, and train'd to war
    These captains emulous of each other's glory.                    120
    Thou fear'd'st, great Pompey, that late deeds would dim
    Old triumphs, and that Csar's conquering France
    Would dash the wreath thou war'st for pirates' wreck:
    Thee war's use stirr'd, and thoughts that always scorn'd
    A second place. Pompey could bide no equal,
    Nor Csar no superior: which of both
    Had justest cause, unlawful 'tis to judge:
    Each side had great partakers; Csar's cause
    The gods abetted, Cato lik'd the other.[591]
    Both differ'd much. Pompey was struck in years,                  130
    And by long rest forgot to manage arms,
    And, being popular, sought by liberal gifts
    To gain the light unstable commons' love,
    And joy'd to hear his theatre's applause:
    He lived secure, boasting his former deeds,
    And thought his name sufficient to uphold him:
    Like to a tall oak in a fruitful field,
    Bearing old spoils and conquerors' monuments,
    Who, though his root be weak, and his own weight
    Keep him within the ground, his arms all bare,                   140
    His body, not his boughs, send forth a shade;
    Though every blast it nod,[592] and seem to fall,
    When all the woods about stand bolt upright,
    Yet he alone is held in reverence.
    Csar's renown for war was loss; he restless,
    Shaming to strive but where he did subdue;
    When ire or hope provok'd, heady and bold;
    At all times charging home, and making havoc;
    Urging his fortune, trusting in the gods,
    Destroying what withstood his proud desires,                     150
    And glad when blood and ruin made him way:
    So thunder, which the wind tears from the clouds,
    With crack of riven air and hideous sound
    Filling the world, leaps out and throws forth fire,
    Affrights poor fearful men, and blasts their eyes
    With overthwarting flames, and raging shoots
    Alongst the air, and, not resisting it,
    Falls, and returns, and shivers where it lights.
    Such humours stirr'd them up; but this war's seed
    Was even the same that wrecks all great dominions.               160
    When Fortune made us lords of all, wealth flow'd,
    And then we grew licentious and rude;
    The soldiers' prey and rapine brought in riot;
    Men took delight in jewels, houses, plate,
    And scorn'd old sparing diet, and ware robes
    Too light for women; Poverty, who hatch'd
    Rome's greatest wits,[593] was loath'd, and all the world
    Ransack'd for gold, which breeds the world['s] decay;
    And then large limits had their butting lands;
    The ground, which Curius and Camillus till'd,                    170
    Was stretched unto the fields of hinds unknown.
    Again, this people could not brook calm peace;
    Them freedom without war might not suffice:
    Quarrels were rife; greedy desire, still poor,
    Did vild deeds; then 'twas worth the price of blood,
    And deem'd renown, to spoil their native town;
    Force mastered right, the strongest govern'd all;
    Hence came it that th' edicts were over-rul'd,
    That laws were broke, tribunes with consuls strove,
    Sale made of offices, and people's voices                        180
    Bought by themselves and sold, and every year
    Frauds and corruption in the Field of Mars;
    Hence interest and devouring usury sprang,
    Faith's breach, and hence came war, to most men welcome.
    Now Csar overpass'd the snowy Alps;
    His mind was troubled, and he aim'd at war:
    And coming to the ford of Rubicon,
    At night in dreadful vision fearful[594] Rome
    Mourning appear'd, whose hoary hairs were torn,
    And on her turret-bearing head dispers'd,                        190
    And arms all naked; who, with broken sighs,
    And staring, thus bespoke: "What mean'st thou, Csar?
    Whither goes my standard? Romans if ye be,
    And bear true hearts, stay here!" This spectacle
    Struck Csar's heart with fear; his hair stood up,
    And faintness numb'd his steps there on the brink.
    He thus cried out: "Thou thunderer that guard'st
    Rome's mighty walls, built on Tarpeian rock!
    Ye gods of Phrygia and Ilus' line,
    Quirinus' rites, and Latian Jove advanc'd                        200
    On Alba hill! O vestal flames! O Rome,
    My thoughts sole goddess, aid mine enterprise!
    I hate thee not, to thee my conquests stoop:
    Csar is thine, so please it thee, thy soldier.
    He, he afflicts Rome that made me Rome's foe."
    This said, he, laying aside all lets[595] of war,
    Approach'd the swelling stream with drum and ensign:
    Like to a lion of scorch'd desert Afric,
    Who, seeing hunters, pauseth till fell wrath
    And kingly rage increase, then, having whisk'd                   210
    His tail athwart his back, and crest heav'd up,
    With jaws wide-open ghastly roaring out,
    Albeit the Moor's light javelin or his spear
    Sticks in his side, yet runs upon the hunter.
      In summer-time the purple Rubicon,
    Which issues from a small spring, is but shallow,
    And creeps along the vales, dividing just
    The bounds of Italy from Cisalpine France.
    But now the winter's wrath, and watery moon
    Being three days old, enforc'd the flood to swell,               220
    And frozen Alps thaw'd with resolving winds.
    The thunder-hoof'd[596] horse, in a crookd line,
    To scape the violence of the stream, first waded;
    Which being broke, the foot had easy passage.
    As soon as Csar got unto the bank
    And bounds of Italy, "Here, here," saith he,
    "An end of peace; here end polluted laws!
    Hence leagues and covenants! Fortune, thee I follow!
    War and the Destinies shall try my cause."
    This said, the restless general through the dark,                230
    Swifter than bullets thrown from Spanish slings,
    Or darts which Parthians backward shoot, march'd on;
    And then, when Lucifer did shine alone,
    And some dim stars, he Ariminum enter'd.
    Day rose, and view'd these tumults of the war:
    Whether the gods or blustering south were cause
    I know not, but the cloudy air did frown.
    The soldiers having won the market-place,
    There spread the colours with confusd noise
    Of trumpets' clang, shrill cornets, whistling fifes.             240
    The people started; young men left their beds,
    And snatch'd arms near their household-gods hung up,
    Such as peace yields; worm-eaten leathern targets,
    Through which the wood peer'd,[597] headless darts, old swords
    With ugly teeth of black rust foully scarr'd.
    But seeing white eagles, and Rome's flags well known,
    And lofty Csar in the thickest throng,
    They shook for fear, and cold benumb'd their limbs,
    And muttering much, thus to themselves complain'd:
    "O walls unfortunate, too near to France!                        250
    Predestinate to ruin! all lands else
    Have stable peace: here war's rage first begins;
    We bide the first brunt. Safer might we dwell
    Under the frosty bear, or parching east,
    Waggons or tents, than in this frontier town.
    We first sustain'd the uproars of the Gauls
    And furious Cimbrians, and of Carthage Moors:
    As oft as Rome was sack'd, here gan the spoil."
    Thus sighing whisper'd they, and none durst speak,
    And show their fear or grief; but as the fields                  260
    When birds are silent thorough winter's rage,
    Or sea far from the land, so all were whist,[598]
    Now light had quite dissolv'd the misty night,
    And Csar's mind unsettled musing stood;
    But gods and fortune pricked him to this war,
    Infringing all excuse of modest shame,
    And labouring to approve[599] his quarrel good.
    The angry senate, urging Gracchus'[600] deeds,
    From doubtful Rome wrongly expell'd the tribunes
    That cross'd them: both which now approach'd the camp,           270
    And with them Curio, sometime tribune too,
    One that was fee'd for Csar, and whose tongue
    Could tune the people to the nobles' mind.[601]
    "Csar," said he, "while eloquence prevail'd,
    And I might plead and draw the commons' minds
    To favour thee, against the senate's will,
    Five years I lengthen'd thy command in France;
    But law being put to silence by the wars,
    We, from her houses driven, most willingly
    Suffer'd exile: let thy sword bring us home,                     280
    Now, while their part is weak and fears, march hence:
    Where men are ready lingering ever hurts.[602]
    In ten years wonn'st thou France: Rome may be won
    With far less toil, and yet the honour's more;
    Few battles fought with prosperous success
    May bring her down, and with her all the world.
    Nor shalt thou triumph when thou com'st to Rome,
    Nor Capitol be adorn'd with sacred bays;
    Envy denies all; with thy blood must thou
    Aby thy conquest past:[603] the son decrees                      290
    To expel the father: share the world thou canst not;
    Enjoy it all thou mayst." Thus Curio spake;
    And therewith Csar, prone enough to war,
    Was so incens'd as are Elean[604] steeds.
    With clamours, who, though lock'd and chain'd in stalls,[605]
    Souse[606] down the walls, and make a passage forth.
    Straight summon'd he his several companies
    Unto the standard: his grave look appeas'd
    The wrestling tumult, and right hand made silence;
    And thus he spake: "You that with me have borne                  300
    A thousand brunts, and tried me full ten years,
    See how they quit our bloodshed in the north,
    Our friends' death, and our wounds, our wintering
    Under the Alps! Rome rageth now in arms
    As if the Carthage Hannibal were near;
    Cornets of horse are muster'd for the field;
    Woods turn'd to ships; both land and sea against us.
    Had foreign wars ill-thriv'd, or wrathful France
    Pursu'd us hither, how were we bested,
    When, coming conqueror, Rome afflicts me thus?                   310
    Let come their leader[607] whom long peace hath quail'd,
    Raw soldiers lately press'd, and troops of gowns,
    Babbling[608] Marcellus, Cato whom fools reverence!
    Must Pompey's followers, with strangers' aid
    (Whom from his youth he brib'd), needs make him king?
    And shall he triumph long before his time,
    And, having once got head, still shall he reign?
    What should I talk of men's corn reap'd by force,
    And by him kept of purpose for a dearth?
    Who sees not war sit by the quivering judge,                     320
    And sentence given in rings of naked swords,
    And laws assail'd, and arm'd men in the senate?
    'Twas his troop hemm'd in Milo being accus'd;
    And now, lest age might wane his state, he casts
    For civil war, wherein through use he's known
    To exceed his master, that arch-traitor Sylla.
    A[s] brood of barbarous tigers, having lapp'd
    The blood of many a herd, whilst with their dams
    They kennell'd in Hyrcania, evermore
    Will rage and prey; so, Pompey, thou, having lick'd              330
    Warm gore from Sylla's sword, art yet athirst:
    Jaws flesh[ed] with blood continue murderous.
    Speak, when shall this thy long-usurped power end?
    What end of mischief? Sylla teaching thee,
    At last learn, wretch, to leave thy monarchy!
    What, now Sicilian[609] pirates are suppress'd,
    And jaded[610] king of Pontus poison'd slain,
    Must Pompey as his last foe plume on me,
    Because at his command I wound not up
    My conquering eagles? say I merit naught,[611]                   340
    Yet, for long service done, reward these men,
    And so they triumph, be't with whom ye will.
    Whither now shall these old bloodless souls repair?
    What seats for their deserts? what store of ground
    For servitors to till? what colonies
    To rest their bones? say, Pompey, are these worse
    Than pirates of Sicilia?[612] they had houses.
    Spread, spread these flags that ten years' space have conquer'd!
    Let's use our tried force: they that now thwart right,
    In wars will yield to wrong:[613] the gods are with us;          350
    Neither spoil nor kingdom seek we by these arms,
    But Rome, at thraldom's feet, to rid from tyrants."
    This spoke, none answer'd, but a murmuring buzz
    Th' unstable people made: their household-gods
    And love to Rome (though slaughter steel'd their hearts,
    And minds were prone) restrain'd them; but war's love
    And Csar's awe dash'd all. Then Llius,[614]
    The chief centurion, crown'd with oaken leaves
    For saving of a Roman citizen,
    Stepp'd forth, and cried: "Chief leader of Rome's force,
    So be I may be bold to speak a truth,                            361
    We grieve at this thy patience and delay.
    What, doubt'st thou us? even now when youthful blood
    Pricks forth our lively bodies, and strong arms
    Can mainly throw the dart, wilt thou endure
    These purple grooms, that senate's tyranny?
    Is conquest got by civil war so heinous?
    Well, lead us, then, to Syrtes' desert shore,
    Or Scythia, or hot Libya's thirsty sands.
    This band, that all behind us might be quail'd,                  370
    Hath with thee pass'd the swelling ocean,
    And swept the foaming breast of Arctic[615] Rhene.
    Love over-rules my will; I must obey thee,
    Csar: he whom I hear thy trumpets charge,
    I hold no Roman; by these ten blest ensigns
    And all thy several triumphs, shouldst thou bid me
    Entomb my sword within my brother's bowels,
    Or father's throat, or women's groaning[616] womb,
    This hand, albeit unwilling, should perform it?
    Or rob the gods, or sacred temples fire,                         380
    These troops should soon pull down the church of Jove;[617]
    If to encamp on Tuscan Tiber's streams,
    I'll boldly quarter out the fields of Rome;
    What walls thou wilt be levell'd with the ground,
    These hands shall thrust the ram, and make them fly,
    Albeit the city thou wouldst have so raz'd
    Be Rome itself." Here every band applauded,
    And, with their hands held up, all jointly cried
    They'll follow where he please. The shouts rent heaven,
    As when against pine-bearing Ossa's rocks                        390
    Beats Thracian Boreas, or when trees bow[618] down
    And rustling swing up as the wind fets[619] breath.
    When Csar saw his army prone to war,
    And Fates so bent, lest sloth and long delay
    Might cross him, he withdrew his troops from France,
    And in all quarters musters men for Rome.
    They by Lemannus' nook forsook their tents;
    They whom[620] the Lingones foil'd with painted spears,
    Under the rocks by crookd Vogesus;
    And many came from shallow Isara,                                400
    Who, running long, falls in a greater flood,
    And, ere he sees the sea, loseth his name;
    The yellow Ruthens left their garrisons;
    Mild Atax glad it bears not Roman boats,[621]
    And frontier Varus that the camp is far,
    Sent aid; so did Alcides' port, whose seas
    Eat hollow rocks, and where the north-west wind
    Nor zephyr rules not, but the north alone
    Turmoils the coast, and enterance forbids;
    And others came from that uncertain shore                        410
    Which is nor sea nor land, but ofttimes both,
    And changeth as the ocean ebbs and flows;
    Whether the sea roll'd always from that point
    Whence the wind blows, still forcd to and fro;
    Or that the wandering main follow the moon;
    Or flaming Titan, feeding on the deep,
    Pulls them aloft, and makes the surge kiss heaven;
    Philosophers, look you; for unto me,
    Thou cause, whate'er thou be, whom God assigns
    This great effect, art hid. They came that dwell                 420
    By Nemes' fields and banks of Satirus,[622]
    Where Tarbell's winding shores embrace the sea;
    The Santons that rejoice in Csar's love;[623]
    Those of Bituriges,[624] and light Axon[625] pikes;
    And they of Rhene and Leuca,[626] cunning darters,
    And Sequana that well could manage steeds;
    The Belgians apt to govern British cars;
    Th' A[r]verni, too, which boldly feign themselves
    The Roman's brethren, sprung of Ilian race;
    The stubborn Nervians stain'd with Cotta's blood;                430
    And Vangions who, like those of Sarmata,
    Wear open slops;[627] and fierce Batavians,
    Whom trumpet's clang incites; and those that dwell
    By Cinga's stream, and where swift Rhodanus
    Drives Araris to sea; they near the hills,
    Under whose hoary rocks Gebenna hangs;
    And, Trevier, thou being glad that wars are past thee;
    And you, late-shorn Ligurians, who were wont
    In large-spread hair to exceed the rest of France;
    And where to Hesus and fell Mercury[628]                         440
    They offer human flesh, and where Jove seems
    Bloody like Dian, whom the Scythians serve.
    And you, French Bardi, whose immortal pens
    Renown the valiant souls slain in your wars,
    Sit safe at home and chant sweet poesy.
    And, Druides, you now in peace renew
    Your barbarous customs and sinister rites:
    In unfell'd woods and sacred groves you dwell;
    And only gods and heavenly powers you know,
    Or only know you nothing; for you hold                           450
    That souls pass not to silent Erebus
    Or Pluto's bloodless kingdom, but elsewhere
    Resume a body; so (if truth you sing)
    Death brings long life. Doubtless these northern men,
    Whom death, the greatest of all fears, affright not,
    Are blest by such sweet error; this makes them
    Run on the sword's point, and desire to die,
    And shame to spare life which being lost is won.
    You likewise that repuls'd the Cac foe,
    March towards Rome; and you, fierce men of Rhene,                460
    Leaving your country open to the spoil.
    These being come, their huge power made him bold
    To manage greater deeds; the bordering towns
    He garrison'd; and Italy he fill'd with soldiers.
    Vain fame increased true fear, and did invade
    The people's minds, and laid before their eyes
    Slaughter to come, and, swiftly bringing news
    Of present war, made many lies and tales:
    One swears his troops of daring horsemen fought
    Upon Mevania's plain, where bulls are graz'd;                    470
    Other that Csar's barbarous bands were spread
    Along Nar flood that into Tiber falls,
    And that his own ten ensigns and the rest
    March'd not entirely, and yet hide the ground;
    And that he's much chang'd, looking wild and big,
    And far more barbarous than the French, his vassals;
    And that he lags[629] behind with them, of purpose,
    Borne 'twixt the Alps and Rhene, which he hath brought
    From out their northern parts,[630] and that Rome,
    He looking on, by these men should be sack'd.                    480
    Thus in his fright did each man strengthen fame,
    And, without ground, fear'd what themselves had feign'd.
    Nor were the commons only struck to heart
    With this vain terror; but the court, the senate,
    The fathers selves leap'd from their seats, and, flying,
    Left hateful war decreed to both the consuls.
    Then, with their fear and danger all-distract,
    Their sway of flight carries the heady rout,[631]
    That in chain'd[632] troops break forth at every port:
    You would have thought their houses had been fir'd,              490
    Or, dropping-ripe, ready to fall with ruin.
    So rush'd the inconsiderate multitude
    Thorough the city, hurried headlong on,
    As if the only hope that did remain
    To their afflictions were t' abandon Rome.
    Look how, when stormy Auster from the breach
    Of Libyan Syrtes rolls a monstrous wave,
    Which makes the main-sail fall with hideous sound,
    The pilot from the helm leaps in the sea,
    And mariners, albeit the keel be sound,                          500
    Shipwreck themselves; even so, the city left,
    All rise in arms; nor could the bed-rid parents
    Keep back their sons, or women's tears their husbands:
    They stayed not either to pray or sacrifice;
    Their household-gods restrain them not; none lingered,
    As loath to leave Rome whom they held so dear:
    Th' irrevocable people fly in troops.
    O gods, that easy grant men great estates,
    But hardly grace to keep them! Rome, that flows
    With citizens and captives,[633] and would hold                  510
    The world, were it together, is by cowards
    Left as a prey, now Csar doth approach.
    When Romans are besieged by foreign foes,
    With slender trench they escape night-stratagems,
    And sudden rampire rais'd of turf snatched up,
    Would make them sleep securely in their tents.
    Thou, Rome, at name of war runn'st from thyself,
    And wilt not trust thy city-walls one night:
    Well might these fear, when Pompey feared and fled.
    Now evermore, lest some one hope might ease                      520
    The commons' jangling minds, apparent signs arose,
    Strange sights appeared; the angry threatening gods
    Filled both the earth and seas with prodigies.
    Great store of strange and unknown stars were seen
    Wandering about the north, and rings of fire
    Fly in the air, and dreadful bearded stars,
    And comets that presage the fall of kingdoms;
    The flattering[634] sky glittered in often flames,
    And sundry fiery meteors blazed in heaven,
    Now spear-like long, now like a spreading torch;                 530
    Lightning in silence stole forth without clouds,
    And, from the northern climate snatching fire,
    Blasted the Capitol; the lesser stars,
    Which wont to run their course through empty night,
    At noon-day mustered; Phoebe, having filled
    Her meeting horns to match her brother's light,
    Struck with th' earth's sudden shadow, waxd pale;
    Titan himself, throned in the midst of heaven,
    His burning chariot plunged in sable clouds,
    And whelmed the world in darkness, making men                    540
    Despair of day; as did Thyestes' town,
    Mycen, Phoebus flying through the east.
    Fierce Mulciber unbarrd tna's gate,
    Which flamd not on high, but headlong pitched
    Her burning head on bending Hespery.
    Coal-black Charybdis whirled a sea of blood.
    Fierce mastives howled. The vestal fires went out;
    The flame in Alba, consecrate to Jove,
    Parted in twain, and with a double point
    Rose, like the Theban brothers' funeral fire.                    550
    The earth went off her hinges; and the Alps
    Shook the old snow from off their trembling laps.[635]
    The ocean swelled as high as Spanish Calpe
    Or Atlas' head. Their saints and household-gods
    Sweat tears, to show the travails of their city:
    Crowns fell from holy statues. Ominous birds
    Defiled the day; and wild beasts were seen,[636]
    Leaving the woods, lodge in the streets of Rome.
    Cattle were seen that muttered human speech;
    Prodigious births with more and ugly joints                      560
    Than nature gives, whose sight appals the mother;
    And dismal prophecies were spread abroad:
    And they, whom fierce Bellona's fury moves
    To wound their arms, sing vengeance; Cybel's[637] priests,
    Curling their bloody locks, howl dreadful things.
    Souls quiet and appeas'd sighed from their graves;
    Clashing of arms was heard; in untrod woods
    Shrill voices schright;[638] and ghosts encounter men.
    Those that inhabited the suburb-fields
    Fled: foul Erinnys stalked about the walls,                      570
    Shaking her snaky hair and crookd pine
    With flaming top; much like that hellish fiend
    Which made the stern Lycurgus wound his thigh,
    Or fierce Agave mad; or like Megra
    That scar'd Alcides, when by Juno's task
    He had before look'd Pluto in the face.
    Trumpets were heard to sound; and with what noise
    An armd battle joins, such and more strange
    Black night brought forth in secret. Sylla's ghost
    Was seen to walk, singing sad oracles;                           580
    And Marius' head above cold Tav'ron[639] peering,
    His grave broke open, did affright the boors.
    To these ostents, as their old custom was,
    They call th' Etrurian augurs: amongst whom
    The gravest, Arruns, dwelt in forsaken Leuca[640]
    Well-skill'd in pyromancy; one that knew
    The hearts of beasts, and flight of wandering fowls.
    First he commands such monsters Nature hatch'd
    Against her kind, the barren mule's loath'd issue,
    To be cut forth[641] and cast in dismal fires;                   590
    Then, that the trembling citizens should walk
    About the city; then, the sacred priests
    That with divine lustration purg'd the walls,
    And went the round, in and without the town;
    Next, an inferior troop, in tuck'd-up vestures,
    After the Gabine manner; then, the nuns
    And their veil'd matron, who alone might view
    Minerva's statue; then, they that kept and read
    Sibylla's secret works, and wash[642] their saint
    In Almo's flood; next learnd augurs follow;                     600
    Apollo's soothsayers, and Jove's feasting priests;
    The skipping Salii with shields like wedges;
    And Flamens last, with net-work woollen veils.
    While these thus in and out had circled Rome,
    Look, what the lightning blasted, Arruns takes,
    And it inters with murmurs dolorous,
    And calls the place Bidental. On the altar
    He lays a ne'er-yok'd bull, and pours down wine,
    Then crams salt leaven on his crookd knife:
    The beast long struggled, as being like to prove                 610
    An awkward sacrifice; but by the horns
    The quick priest pulled him on his knees, and slew him.
    No vein sprung out, but from the yawning gash,
    Instead of red blood, wallow'd venomous gore.
    These direful signs made Arruns stand amazed,
    And searching farther for the gods' displeasure,
    The very colour scared him; a dead blackness
    Ran through the blood, that turned it all to jelly,
    And stained the bowels with dark loathsome spots;
    The liver swelled with filth; and every vein                     620
    Did threaten horror from the host of Csar
    A small thin skin contained the vital parts;
    The heart stirred not; and from the gaping liver
    Squeezed matter through the caul; the entrails peered;
    And which (ay me!) ever pretendeth[643] ill,
    At that bunch where the liver is, appear'd
    A knob of flesh, whereof one half did look
    Dead and discolour'd, th' other lean and thin.[644]
    By these he seeing what mischiefs must ensue,
    Cried out, "O gods, I tremble to unfold                          630
    What you intend! great Jove is now displeas'd;
    And in the breast of this slain bull are crept
    Th' infernal powers. My fear transcends my words;
    Yet more will happen than I can unfold:
    Turn all to good, be augury vain, and Tages,
    Th' art's master, false!" Thus, in ambiguous terms
    Involving all, did Arruns darkly sing.
    But Figulus, more seen in heavenly mysteries,
    Whose like gyptian Memphis never had
    For skill in stars and tuneful planeting,[645]                   640
    In this sort spake: "The world's swift course is lawless
    And casual; all the stars at random range;[646]
    Or if fate rule them, Rome, thy citizens
    Are near some plague. What mischief shall ensue?
    Shall towns be swallow'd? shall the thicken'd air
    Become intemperate? shall the earth be barren?
    Shall water be congeal'd and turn'd to ice?[647]
    O gods, what death prepare ye? with what plague
    Mean ye to rage? the death of many men
    Meets in one period. If cold noisome Saturn                      650
    Were now exalted, and with blue beams shin'd,
    Then Ganymede[648] would renew Deucalion's flood,
    And in the fleeting sea the earth be drench'd.
    O Phoebus, shouldst thou with thy rays now singe
    The fell Neman beast, th' earth would be fir'd,
    And heaven tormented with thy chafing heat:
    But thy fires hurt not. Mars, 'tis thou inflam'st
    The threatening Scorpion with the burning tail,
    And fir'st his cleys:[649] why art thou thus enrag'd?
    Kind Jupiter hath low declin'd himself;                          660
    Venus is faint; swift Hermes retrograde;
    Mars only rules the heaven. Why do the planets
    Alter their course, and vainly dim their virtue?
    Sword-girt Orion's side glisters too bright:
    War's rage draws near; and to the sword's strong hand
    Let all laws yield, sin bears the name of virtue:
    Many a year these furious broils let last:
    Why should we wish the gods should ever end them?
    War only gives us peace. O Rome, continue
    The course of mischief, and stretch out the date                 670
    Of slaughter! only civil broils make peace."
    These sad presages were enough to scare
    The quivering Romans; but worse things affright them.
    As Mnas[650] full of wine on Pindus raves,
    So runs a matron through th' amazd streets,
    Disclosing Phoebus' fury in this sort;
    "Pan, whither am I haled? where shall I fall,
    Thus borne aloft? I seen Pangus' hill
    With hoary top, and, under Hmus' mount,
    Philippi plains. Phoebus, what rage is this?                     680
    Why grapples Rome, and makes war, having no foes?
    Whither turn I now? thou lead'st me toward th' east,
    Where Nile augmenteth the Pelusian sea:
    This headless trunk that lies on Nilus' sand
    I know. Now th[o]roughout the air I fly
    To doubtful Syrtes and dry Afric, where
    A Fury leads the Emathian bands. From thence
    To the pine-bearing[651] hills; thence[652] to the mounts
    Pyrene; and so back to Rome again.
    See, impious war defiles the senate-house!                       690
    New factions rise. Now through the world again
    I go. O Phoebus, show me Neptune's shore,
    And other regions! I have seen Philippi."
    This said, being tir'd with fury, she sunk down.

FOOTNOTES:

[579] Old ed. "launcht."--The forms "lanch" and "lance" are used
indifferently.

[580] Alike.

[581] "Et ardenti _servilia_ bella sub tna."

[582] "Nec polus adversi _calidus_ qua vergitur Austri."

[583] "_Obliquo_ sidere."

[584] Axis.

[585] Tumults.

[586]

            "Summisque negatum,
    Stare diu."

[587] Far-fetched.

[588] "Exiguum dominos commisit asylum."

[589] "So old ed. in some copies which had been corrected at press;
other copies 'Aezean.'"--_Dyce_.

[590] Carr's.

[591] A somewhat weak translation of Lucan's most famous line:--"Victrix
causa diis placuit, sed victa Catoni."

[592] As the line stands we must take "nod" and "fall" transitively
("though every blast make it nod and seem to make it fall"). The
original has "At quamvis primo nutet casura sub Euro."

[593] "Fecunda virorum / Paupertas."

[594] "Ingens visa duci patriae _trepidantis_ imago."

[595] "Inde _moras_ solvit belli."

[596] "Sonipes."

[597] "Nuda jam crate fluentes / Invadunt clypeos."

[598] Silent.

[599] Prove.

[600] "Jactatis ... _Gracchis_."

[601] Marlowe omits to translate the words that follow in the
original:--

    "Utque ducem varias volventem pectore curas
    Conspexit."

[602] A line (omitted by Marlowe) follows in the original:--"Par labor
atque metus pretio majore petuntur."

[603] An obscure rendering of

                  "Gentesque subactas
    Vix impune feres."

[604] Old ed. "Eleius." It is hardly possible to suppose (as Dyce
suggests) that Marlowe took the adjective "Eleus" for a substantive.

[605] A mistranslation of "carcere clauso." ("Carcer" is the barrier or
starting-place in the circus.)

[606] "Immineat foribus." "Souse" is a north-country word meaning to
bang or dash. It is also applied to the swooping-down of a hawk.

[607] Old ed. "leaders."

[608] So Dyce for the old ed's. "Brabbling." The original has
"Marcellusque _loquax_." ("Brabbling" means "wrangling.")

[609] A mistake (or perhaps merely a misprint) for "Cilician."

[610] Old ed. has "Jaded, king of Pontus!"

[611] "Unless we understand this in the sense of--say I receive no
reward (--and in Fletcher's _Woman-Hater_, 'merit' means--derive profit,
B. and F.'s _Works_, i. 91, ed. Dyce,--), it is a wrong translation of
'mihi si merces erepta laborum est.'"--_Dyce_.

[612] "Sicilia" should be "Cilicia."

[613] A free translation of the frigid original--

                      "Arma tenenti
    Omnia dat qui justa negat."

[614] Old ed. "Lalius."

[615] Old ed. "_Articks_ Rhene." ("Rhene" is the old form of "Rhine.")

[616] So old ed. Dyce's correction "or groaning woman's womb" seems
hardly necessary. (The original has "plenaeque in viscera partu
conjugis.")

[617] "Numina miscebit castrensis flamma _Monetae_."

[618] Old ed. "bowde."

[619] Fetches.

[620] The original has--

    "Castraque quae, Vogesi curvam super ardua rupem,
    Pugnaces pictis cohibebant _Lingonas_ armis."

Dyce conjectures that Marlowe's copy read _Lingones_.

[621] Old ed. "bloats."

[622]

                  "Tunc rura Nemossi
    Qui tenet et ripas Aturi."

[623] Marlowe seems to have read here very ridiculously, "gaudetque
amato [instead of amoto] Santonus hoste."--_Dyce_.

[624] Marlowe has converted the name of a tribe into that of a country.

[625] The approved reading is "longisque leves _Suessones_ in armis."

[626] "Optimus excusso _Leucus Rhemusque_ lacerto."

[627] "Et qui te _laxis_ imitantur, Sarmata, _bracchis_ Vangiones."

Marlowe has mistaken "Sarmata," a _Sarmatian_, for the country
_Sarmatia_.

[628] The old ed. gives "fell Mercury (Joue)," and in the next line
"where it seems." "Jove" written, as a correction, in the MS. above "it"
was supposed by the printer to belong to the previous line.

[629] The original has--

"Hunc inter Rhenum populos Alpesque jacentes, / Finibus Arctois
patriaque a sede revulsos, / Pone sequi."/ ("Populos" is the subject and
"Hunc" the object of "sequi." For "Hunc" the best editions give "Tunc.")

[630] "Parts" must be pronounced as a dissyllable.

[631] "Praecipitem populum."

[632] "Serieque haerentia longa / Agmina prorumpunt."

[633] "Urbem populis, _victisque_ frequentem Gentibus."--Old ed.
"captaines."

[634] "Fulgura _fallaci_ micuerunt crebra sereno."

[635] The original has, "_jugis_ nutantibus." Dyce reads "tops,"--an
emendation against which Cunningham loudly protests. "Laps" is certainly
more emphatic.

[636] The line is imperfect. We should have expected "_at night_ wild
beasts were seen" ("silvisque feras _sub nocte_ relictis").

[637] Old ed. "Sibils."

[638] Shrieked.

[639] "Gelidas _Anienis_ ad undas."

[640] "Or Lun"--marginal note in old ed.

[641] The original has "rapi."

[642] Old ed. "wash'd."

[643] Portendeth.

[644] Here Marlowe quite deserts the original--

                "pars gra et marcida pendet,
    _Pars micat, et celeri venas movet improba pulsu_."

[645] "Numerisque moventibus astra."--The word "planeting" was, I
suppose, coined by Marlowe. I have never met it elsewhere.

[646] So Dyce.--Old ed. "radge." (The original has "et incerto
_discurrunt_ sidera motu.")

[647] "Omnis an effusis miscebitur unda _venenis_."--Dyce suggests that
Marlowe's copy read "pruinis."

[648] The original has "Aquarius."--Ganymede was changed into the sign
Aquarius: see Hyginus' _Poeticon Astron._ II. 29.

[649] Claws.

[650] A Mnad.--Old ed. "Mnus."

[651] The original has "Nubifer."

[652] Old ed. "hence."




THE PASSIONATE SHEPHERD TO HIS LOVE.




THE PASSIONATE SHEPHERD TO HIS LOVE.[653]


    Come[654] live with me and be my love,
    And we will all the pleasures prove
    That hills and vallies, dales and fields,[655]
    Woods or steepy mountain yields.[656]

    And we will[657] sit upon the rocks,
    Seeing[658] the shepherds feed their[659] flocks
    By shallow rivers to whose falls
    Melodious birds sing[660] madrigals.

    And I will make thee beds of roses[661]
    And[662] a thousand fragrant posies,
    A cup of flowers and a kirtle
    Embroidered all with leaves of myrtle.

    A gown[663] made of the finest wooll
    Which from our pretty lambs we pull;
    Fair-lind[664] slippers for the cold,
    With buckles of the purest gold.

    A belt of straw and ivy-buds,
    With coral clasps and amber studs;
    An if these pleasures may thee move,
    Come[665] live with me, and be my love.

    The shepherd-swains[666] shall dance and sing
    For thy delight each May-morning:
    If these delights thy mind may move,
    Then live with me, and be my love.

FOOTNOTES:

[653] This delightful pastoral song was first published, without the
fourth and sixth stanzas, in _The Passionate Pilgrim_, 1599. It appeared
complete in _England's Helicon_, 1600, with Marlowe's name subscribed.
By quoting it in the _Complete Angler_, 1653, Izaak Walton has made it
known to a world of readers.

[654] Omitted in P. P.

[655] So P. P.--E. H. "That vallies, groves, hills and fieldes."--Walton
"That vallies, groves, or hils or fields."

[656] So E. H.--P. P. "And the craggy mountain yields."--Walton "Or,
woods and steepie mountains yeelds."

[657] So E. H.--P. P. "There will we."--Walton "Where we will."

[658] So E. H.--P. P. and Walton "And see."

[659] So E. H. and P. P.--Walton "our."

[660] So P. P. and Walton.--E. H. "sings."

[661] So E. H. and Walton.--P. P. "There will I make thee a bed of
roses."

[662] So E. H.--P. P. "With."--Walton "And then."

[663] This stanza is omitted in P. P.

[664] So E. H.--Walton "Slippers lin'd choicely."

[665] So E. H. and Walton.--P. P. "Then."--After this stanza there
follows in the second edition of the _Complete Angler_, 1655, an
additional stanza:--

    "Thy silver dishes for thy meat
    As precious as the gods do eat,
    Shall on an ivory table be
    Prepar'd each day for thee and me."

[666] This stanza is omitted in P. P.--E. H. and Walton "The
sheep-heards swaines."




    [In _England's Helicon_ Marlowe's song is followed by the "Nymph's
    Reply to the Shepherd" and "Another of the same Nature made since."
    Both are signed _Ignoto_, but the first of these pieces has been
    usually ascribed to Sir Walter Raleigh[667]--on no very substantial
    grounds.]


THE NYMPH'S REPLY TO THE SHEPHERD.


    If all the world and love were young,
    And truth in every Shepherd's tongue,
    These pretty pleasures might me move
    To live with thee, and be thy love.

    Times drives the flocks from field to fold,
    When rivers rage and rocks grow cold,
    And Philomel becometh dumb,
    The rest complains of cares to come.

    The flowers do fade and wanton fields
    To wayward winter reckoning yields;
    A honey tongue, a heart of gall,
    Is fancy's spring, but sorrow's fall.

    Thy gowns, thy shoes, thy beds of roses,
    Thy cap, thy kirtle, and thy posies,
    Soon break, soon wither, soon forgotten;
    In folly ripe, in reason rotten.

    Thy belt of straw and ivy buds,
    Thy coral clasps and amber studs,
    All these to me no means can move
    To come to thee, and be thy love.

    But could youth last and love still breed,
    Had joys no date nor age no need,
    Then these delights my mind might move
    To live with thee, and be thy love.

FOOTNOTES:

[667] Oldys in his annotated copy (preserved in the British Museum) of
Langbaine's _Engl. Dram. Poets_, under the article _Marlowe_
remarks:--"Sir Walter Raleigh was an encourager of his [_i.e._
Marlowe's] Muse; and he wrote an answer to a Pastoral Sonnet of Sir
Walter's [_sic_], printed by Isaac Walton in his book of fishing." It
would be pleasant to think that Marlowe enjoyed Raleigh's patronage; but
Oldys gives no authority for his statement.




ANOTHER OF THE SAME NATURE MADE SINCE.


    Come live with me, and be my dear,
    And we will revel all the year,
    In plains and groves, on hills and dales,
    Where fragrant air breathes sweetest gales.

    There shall you have the beauteous pine,
    The cedar, and the spreading vine;
    And all the woods to be a screen,
    Lest Phoebus kiss my Summer's Queen.

    The seat for your disport shall be
    Over some river in a tree,
    Where silver sands and pebbles sing
    Eternal ditties to the spring.

    There shall you see the nymphs at play,
    And how the satyrs spend the day;
    The fishes gliding on the sands,
    Offering their bellies to your hands.

    The birds with heavenly tund throats
    Possess woods' echoes with sweet notes,
    Which to your senses will impart
    A music to enflame the heart.

    Upon the bare and leafless oak
    The ring-doves' wooings will provoke
    A colder blood than you possess
    To play with me and do no less.

    In bowers of laurel trimly dight
    We will out-wear the silent night,
    While Flora busy is to spread
    Her richest treasure on our bed.

    Ten thousand glow-worms shall attend,
    And all these sparkling lights shall spend
    All to adorn and beautify
    Your lodging with most majesty.

    Then in mine arms will I enclose
    Lilies' fair mixture with the rose,
    Whose nice perfection in love's play
    Shall tune me to the highest key.

    Thus as we pass the welcome night
    In sportful pleasures and delight,
    The nimble fairies on the grounds,
    Shall dance and sing melodious sounds.

    If these may serve for to entice
    Your presence to Love's Paradise,
    Then come with me, and be my dear,
    And we will then begin the year.




The following verses in imitation of Marlowe are by Donne:--


THE BAIT.

    Come live with me, and be my love,
    And we will some new pleasure prove
    Of golden sands and christal brooks
    With silken lines and silver hooks.

    There will the river whispering run,
    Warm'd by thine eyes more than the sun;
    And there th' enamoured fish will stay
    Begging themselves they may betray.

    When thou wilt swim in that live bath,
    Each fish which every channel hath
    Will amorously to thee swim,
    Gladder to catch thee than thou him.

    If thou to be so seen beest loath
    By sun or moon, thou darkenest both;
    And if my self have leave to see,
    I heed not their light, having thee.

    Let others freeze with angling reeds
    And cut their legs with shells and weeds,
    Or treacherously poor fish beset
    With strangling snare or winding net.

    Let coarse bold hands from slimy nest
    The bedded fish in banks outwrest,
    Or curious traitors, sleave-silk flies,
    Bewitch poor fishes' wandering eyes.

    For thee, thou need'st no such deceit,
    For thou thyself art thine own bait:
    That fish that is not catched thereby,
    Alas, is wiser far than I.




Herrick has a pastoral invitation

TO PHILLIS TO LOVE AND LIVE WITH HIM.


    Live, live with me, and thou shalt see
    The pleasures I'll prepare for thee;
    What sweets the country can afford
    Shall bless thy bed and bless thy board.

    The soft sweet moss shall be thy bed
    With crawling woodbine overspread:
    By which the silver-shedding streams
    Shall gently melt thee into dreams.

    Thy clothing next shall be a gown
    Made of the fleeces' purest down.
    The tongues of kids shall be thy meat;
    Their milk thy drink; and thou shall eat

    The paste of filberts for thy bread,
    With cream of cowslips buttered.
    Thy feasting-tables shall be hills
    With daisies spread and daffodils;

    Where thou shalt sit, and red-breast by
    For meat shall give thee melody.
    I'll give thee chains and carcanets
    Of primroses and violets.

    A bag and bottle thou shalt have,
    That richly wrought and this as brave,
    So that as either shall express
    The wearer's no mean shepherdess.

    At shearing-times and yearly wakes,
    When Themilis his pastime makes,
    There thou shalt be; and be the wit,
    Nay more, the feast and grace of it.

    On holidays when virgins meet
    To dance the hays with nimble feet,
    Thou shalt come forth and then appear
    The queen of roses for that year;

    And having danced ('bove all the best)
    Carry the garland from the rest.
    In wicker-baskets maids shall bring
    To thee, my dearest shepherdling,

    The blushing apple, bashful pear,
    And shame-faced plum all simp'ring there:
    Walk in the groves and thou shalt find
    The name of Phillis in the rind

    Of every straight and smooth-skin tree,
    Where kissing that I'll twice kiss thee.
    To thee a sheep-hook I will send
    Be-prankt with ribands to this end,

    This, this alluring hook might be
    Less for to catch a sheep than me.
    Thou shalt have possets, wassails fine,
    Not made of ale but spiced wine;

    To make thy maids and self free mirth,
    All sitting near the glittering hearth.
    Thou shalt have ribbands, roses, rings,
    Gloves, garters, stockings, shoes and strings,
    Of winning colours that shall move
    Others to lust but me to love.
    These, nay, and more, thine own shall be
    If thou wilt love and live with me.




FRAGMENT.[668]


    I walk'd along a stream, for pureness rare,
      Brighter than sun-shine; for it did acquaint
    The dullest sight with all the glorious prey
    That in the pebble-pavd channel lay.

    No molten crystal, but a richer mine,
      Even Nature's rarest alchymy ran there,--
    Diamonds resolv'd, and substance more divine,
      Through whose bright-gliding current might appear
    A thousand naked nymphs, whose ivory shine,
      Enamelling the banks, made them more dear
    Than ever was that glorious palace' gate
    Where the day-shining Sun in triumph sate.

    Upon this brim the eglantine and rose,
      The tamarisk, olive, and the almond tree,
    As kind companions, in one union grows,
      Folding their twining[669] arms, as oft we see
    Turtle-taught lovers either other close,
      Lending to dulness feeling sympathy;
    And as a costly valance o'er a bed,
      So did their garland-tops the brook o'erspread.

    Their leaves, that differ'd both in shape and show,
      Though all were green, yet difference such in green,
    Like to the checker'd bent of Iris' bow,
      Prided the running main, as it had been--

FOOTNOTES:

[668] From _England's Parnassus_, 1600, p. 480, where it is subscribed
"Ch. Marlowe."

[669] The text of _England's Parnassus_ has "twindring," which is
corrected in the _Errata_, to "twining."




DIALOGUE IN VERSE.[670]


JACK.

    Seest thou not yon farmer's son?
      He hath stoln my love from me, alas!
    What shall I do? I am undone;
      My heart will ne'er be as it was.
    O, but he gives her gay gold rings,
      And tufted gloves [for] holiday,
    And many other goodly things,
      That hath stolen my love away.


FRIEND.

    Let him give her gay gold rings
      Or tufted gloves, were they ne'er so [gay];                     10
    [F]or were her lovers lords or kings,
      They should not carry the wench away.


[JACK.]

    But 'a dances wonders well,
      And with his dances stole her love from me:
    Yet she wont to say I bore the bell
      For dancing and for courtesy.


DICK.[671]

    Fie, lusty younker, what do you here,
      Not dancing on the green to-day?
    For Pierce, the farmer's son, I fear,
      Is like to carry your wench away.                               20


[JACK.]

    Good Dick, bid them all come hither,
      And tell Pierce from me beside,
    That, if he thinks to have the wench,
      Here he stands shall lie with the bride.


DICK.[672]

    Fie, Nan, why use thy old lover so,
      For any other new-come guest?
    Thou long time his love did know;
      Why shouldst thou not use him best?


[NAN.]

    Bonny Dick, I will not forsake
      My bonny Rowland for any gold:                                  30
    If he can dance as well as Pierce,
      He shall have my heart in hold.


PIERCE.

    Why, then, my hearts, let's to this gear;
      And by dancing I may won
    My Nan, whose love I hold so dear
      As any realm under the sun.


GENTLEMAN.[673]

    Then, gentles, ere I speed from hence
      I will be so bold to dance
    A turn or two without offence;
      For, as I was walking along by chance,                          40
      I was told you did agree.


[FRIEND.]

    'Tis true, good sir; and this is she
      Hopes your worship comes not to crave her;
    For she hath lovers two or three,
      And he that dances best must have her.


GENTLEMAN.

    How say you, sweet, will you dance with me?
      And you [shall] have both land and [hill];
    My love shall want nor gold nor fee.


[NAN.]

      I thank you, sir, for your good will;
    But one of these my love must be:                                 50
      I'm but a homely country maid,
    And far unfit for your degree;
      [To dance with you I am afraid.]


FRIEND.

    Take her, good sir, by the hand,
      As she is fairest; were she fairer,
    By this dance, you shall understand,
      He that can win her is like to wear her.


FOOL.

    And saw you not [my] Nan to-day,
      My mother's maid have you not seen?
    My pretty Nan is gone away                                        60
      To seek her love upon the green.
    [I cannot see her 'mong so many:]
    She shall have me, if she have any.


NAN.[674]

    Welcome, sweet-heart, and welcome here,
      Welcome, my [true] love, now to me.
    This is my love [and my darling dear],
      And that my husband [soon] must be.
    And, boy, when thou com'st home thou'lt see
    Thou art as welcome home as he.


GENTLEMAN.

    Why, how now, sweet Nan! I hope you jest.                         70


NAN.[675]

    No, by my troth, I love the fool the best:
    And, if you be jealous, God give you good-night!
    I fear you're a gelding, you caper so light.


GENTLEMAN.

    I thought she had jested and meant but a fable,
    But now do I see she hath play'[d] with his bable.[676]
    I wish all my friends by me to take heed,
    That a fool come not near you when you mean to speed.

FOOTNOTES:

[670] First printed in _The Alleyn Papers_ (for the Shakespeare
Society), p. 8, by Collier, who remarks:--"In the original MS. this
dramatic dialogue in verse is written as prose, on one side of a sheet
of paper, at the back of which, in a more modern hand, is the name 'Kitt
Marlowe.' What connection, if any, he may have had with it, it is
impossible to determine, but it was obviously worthy of preservation, as
a curious stage-relic of an early date, and unlike anything else of the
kind that has come down to us. In consequence of haste or ignorance on
the part of the writer of the manuscript, it has been necessary to
supply some portions, which are printed within brackets. There are also
some obvious errors in the distribution of the dialogue, which it was
not easy to correct. The probability is that, when performed, it was
accompanied with music."

[671] MS. "Jack."

[672] MS. "W. Fre."--which Dyce supposed to be an abbreviation for
_Wench's Friend_.

[673] MS. "Frend."

[674] MS. "Wen" (_i.e._ Wench).

[675] MS. "Wen."

[676] Bauble.




APPENDICES.




APPENDICES.




No. I.

THE ATHEIST'S TRAGEDIE.[677]


    All you that have got eares to heare,
      Now listen unto mee;
    Whilst I do tell a tale of feare;
      A true one it shall bee:

    A truer storie nere was told,
      As some alive can showe;
    'Tis of a man in crime grown olde,
      Though age he did not know.

    This man did his owne God denie
      And Christ his onelie son,
    And did all punishment defie,
      So he his course might run.

    Both day and night would he blaspheme,
      And day and night would sweare,
    As if his life was but a dreame,
      Not ending in dispaire.

    A poet was he of repute,
      And wrote full many a playe,
    Now strutting in a silken sute,
      Then begging by the way.

    He had alsoe a player beene
      Upon the Curtaine-stage,
    But brake his leg in one lewd scene,
      When in his early age.

    He was a fellow to all those
      That did God's laws reject,
    Consorting with the Christians' foes
      And men of ill aspect.

    Ruffians and cutpurses hee
      Had ever at his backe,
    And led a life most foule and free,
      To his eternall wracke.

    He now is gone to his account,
      And gone before his time,
    Did not his wicked deedes surmount
      All precedent of crime.

    But he no warning ever tooke
      From others' wofull fate,
    And never gave his life a looke
      Untill it was too late.

    He had a friend, once gay and greene.[678]
      Who died not long before,
    The wofull'st wretch was ever seen,
      The worst ere woman bore,

    Unlesse this Wormall[679] did exceede
      Even him in wickednesse,
    Who died in the extreemest neede
      And terror's bitternesse.

    Yet Wormall ever kept his course,
      Since nought could him dismay;
    He knew not what thing was remorse
      Unto his dying day.

    Then had he no time to repent
      The crimes he did commit,
    And no man ever did lament
      For him, to dye unfitt.

    Ah, how is knowledge wasted quite
      On such want wisedome true,
    And that which should be guiding light
      But leades to errors newe!

    Well might learnd Cambridge oft regret
      He ever there was bred:
    The tree she in his mind had set
      Brought poison forth instead.

    His lust was lawlesse as his life,
      And brought about his death;
    For, in a deadlie mortall strife,
      Striving to stop the breath

    Of one who was his rivall foe,
      With his owne dagger slaine,
    He groand, and word spoke never moe,
      Pierc'd through the eye and braine.

    Thus did he come to suddaine ende
      That was a foe to all,
    And least unto himselfe a friend,
      And raging passion's thrall.

    Had he been brought up to the trade
      His father follow'd still,
    This exit he had never made,
      Nor played a part soe ill.

    Take warning ye that playes doe make,
      And ye that doe them act;
    Desist in time for Wormall's sake,
      And thinke upon his fact.

    Blaspheming Tambolin must die,
      And Faustus meete his ende;
    Repent, repent, or presentlie
      To hell ye must discend.

    What is there, in this world, of worth,
      That we should prize it soe?
    Life is but trouble from our birth,
      The wise do say and know.

    Our lives, then, let us mend with speed,
      Or we shall suerly rue
    The end of everie hainous deede,
      In life that shall insue.

    _Finis. Ign._

FOOTNOTES:

[677] In the Introduction I have expressed my opinion that this ballad
is a forgery.

[678] We are to suppose an allusion to Robert Greene.

[679] The anagram of Marlowe.




No. II.

In a copy of _Hero and Leander_ Collier found, together with other
questionable matter, the following MS. notes:--"Feb. 10, 1640. Mr. [two
words follow in cipher], that Marloe was an atheist, and wrot a booke
against [two words in cipher,] how that it was all one man's making, and
would have printed it, but it would not be suffred to be printed. Hee
was a rare scholar, and made excellent verses in Latine. He died aged
about 30."--"Marloe was an acquaintance of Mr. [a name follows in
cipher] of Douer, whom hee made become an atheist; so that he was faine
to make a recantation vppon this text, 'The foole hath said in his heart
there is no God.'"--"This [the name in cipher] learned all Marloe by
heart."--"Marloe was stabd with a dagger and dyed swearing."




No. III.

A NOTE[680]

CONTAYNINGE THE OPINION OF ONE CHRISTOFER MARYLE, CONCERNYNGE HIS
DAMNABLE OPINIONS AND JUDGMENT OF RELYGION AND SCORNE OF GODS WORDE.

FROM MS. HARL. 6853, FOL. 320.


That the Indians and many Authors of Antiquitei have assuredly written
of aboue 16 thowsande yeers agone, wher Adam is proved to have leyved
within 6 thowsande yeers.

_He affirmeth_[681] That Moyses was but a Juggler, and that one Heriots
can do more then hee.

That Moyses made the Jewes to travell fortie yeers in the wildernes
(which iorny might have ben don in lesse then one yeer) er they came to
the promised lande, to the intente that those whoe wer privei to most of
his subtileteis might perish, and so an everlastinge supersticion
remayne in the hartes of the people.

That the firste beginnynge of Religion was only to keep men in awe.

That it was an easye matter for Moyses, beinge brought up in all the
artes of the Egiptians, to abvse the Jewes, being a rvde and grosse
people.

*     *     *     *     *     *     *     *     *     *
*     *     *[682]

That he [Christ] was the sonne of a carpenter, and that, yf the Jewes
amonge whome he was born did crvcifye him, thei best knew him and whence
he came.

That Christ deserved better to dye than Barrabas, and that the Jewes
made a good choyce, though Barrabas were both a theife and a murtherer.

That yf ther be any God or good Religion, then it is in the Papistes,
becavse the service of God is performed with more ceremonyes, as
elevacion of the masse, organs, singinge men, _shaven crownes_, &c. That
all protestantes ar hipocriticall Asses.

That, yf he wer put to write a new religion, he wolde vndertake both a
more excellent and more admirable methode, and that all the new
testament is filthely written.

*     *     *     *     *     *     *     *     *     *
*     *     *     *     *

*     *     *     *     *     *     *     *     *     *
*     *     *     *     *     *     *     *     *     *
*     *     *     *     *     *

*     *     *     *     *     *     *     *     *     *
*     *

That all the Appostels wer fishermen and base fellowes, nether of witt
nor worth, that Pawle only had witt, that he was a timerous fellow in
biddinge men to be subiect to magistrates against his conscience.

_That he had as good right to coyne as the Queen of Englande, and that
he was acquainted with one Poole, a prisoner in newgate, whoe hath great
skill in mixture of mettalls, and havinge learned such thinges of him,
he ment, thorough help of a cvnnynge stampe-maker, to coyne french
crownes, pistolettes, and englishe shillinges._

That, yf Christ had instituted the Sacramentes with more cerymonyall
reverence, it would have ben had in more admiracion, that it wolde have
ben much better beinge administred in a Tobacco pype.

*     *     *     *     *     *     *     *     *     *
*     *     *     *     *     *     *     *     *     *

That one Richard Cholmelei[683] hath confessed that he was perswaded by
Marloes reason to become an Athieste.

_Theis thinges, with many other, shall by good and honest men be proved
to be his opinions and common speeches, and that this Marloe doth not
only holde them himself, but almost in every company he commeth,
perswadeth men to Athiesme, willinge them not to be afrayed of bugbeares
and hobgoblins, and vtterly scornynge both God and his ministers, as I
Richard Bome_ [sic] _will justify bothe by my othe and the testimony of
many honest men, and almost all men with whome he hath conversed any
tyme will testefy the same:_ _and, as I thincke, all men in
christianitei ought to endevor that the mouth of so dangerous a member
may be stopped._

_He sayeth moreover that he hath coated[684] a number of contrarieties
out of the scriptures, which he hath geeven to some great men, who in
convenient tyme shalbe named. When theis thinges shalbe called in
question, the witnesses shalbe produced._

                                          RYCHARD BAME.

         (Endorsed)

_Copye of Marloes blasphemyes
    as sent to her H[ighness]._

[Now-a-days inquiries as to the age of the earth are of interest only to
Geologists; and all may criticise with impunity the career of
Moses--provided that they do not employ the shafts of ridicule too
freely. Marlowe's strictures on the New Testament--grossly exaggerated
by the creature who penned the charges--were made from the literary
point of view. We should blame nobody to-day for saying that the
language of Revelations is poor and thin when compared with the language
of Isaiah. Again, as to the statement that Romanism alone is logical,
and that Protestantism has no _locus standi_,--has not the doctrine been
proclaimed again and again in our own day by writers whom we all
respect? The charge that Marlowe had announced his intention of coining
French crowns is so utterly absurd as to throw discredit upon all the
other statements. It must be remembered that the testimony was not upon
oath, and that the deponent was a ruffian.]

FOOTNOTES:

[680] This is the original title, which has been partly scored through
to make way for the following title:--_A Note delivered on Whitson eve
last of the most horrible blasphemes utteryd by Christofer Marly who
within iii dayes after came to a soden and fearfull end of his life._

[681] Words printed in italics are scored through in the MS.

[682] Where _lacun_ occur the clauses are unfit for publication.

[683] In the margin are the words "he is layd for,"--_i.e._, steps are
being taken for his apprehension.

[684] Quoted.




No. IV.


An edition of Marlowe cannot be more fitly concluded than by a reprint
of Mr. R. H. Horne's noble and pathetic tragedy, _The Death of Marlowe_
(originally published in 1837), one of the few dramatic pieces of the
present century that will have any interest for posterity. For
permission to reprint this tragedy I am indebted to Mr. Horne's literary
executor, Mr. H. Buxton Forman.




THE DEATH OF MARLOWE.

    _DRAMATIS PERSON._

    CHRISTOPHER MARLOWE,     } _Dramatists and Actors._
    THOMAS HEYWOOD,          }

    THOMAS MIDDLETON,          _Dramatist._

    CECILIA                  } _Runaway Wife of the drunkard,
                             }    Bengough._

    JACCONOT, _alias_        } _A Tavern Pander and Swashbuckler._
      JACK-O'-NIGHT          }

           _Gentlemen, Officers, Servants, &c._


SCENE I.

       _Public Gardens--Liberty of the Clink, Southwark._

             _Enter_ MARLOWE _and_ HEYWOOD.

HEYWOOD.

  Be sure of it.

MARLOWE.

                I am; but not by your light.

HEYWOOD.

  I speak it not in malice, nor in envy
  Of your good fortune with so bright a beauty;
  But I have heard such things!

MARLOWE.

                                 Good Master Heywood,
  I prithee plague me not with what thou'st heard;
  I've seen, and I do love her--and, for hearing,
  The music of her voice is in my soul,
  And holds a rapturous jubilee 'midst dreams
  That melt the day and night into one bliss.

HEYWOOD.

  Beware the waking hour!

MARLOWE.

                           In lovely radiance,
  Like all that's fabled of Olympus' queen,
  She moves--as if the earth were undulant clouds,
  And all its flowers her subject stars.

HEYWOOD.

                                         Proceed.

MARLOWE.

  Smile not; for 'tis most true: the very air
  With her sweet presence is impregnate richly.
  As in a mead, that's fresh with youngest green,
  Some fragrant shrub, some secret herb, exhales
  Ambrosial odours; or in lonely bower,
  Where one may find the musk plant, heliotrope,
  Geranium, or grape hyacinth, confers
  A ruling influence, charming present sense
  And sure of memory; so, her person bears
  A natural balm, obedient to the rays
  Of heaven--or to her own, which glow within,
  Distilling incense by their own sweet power.
  The dew at sunrise on a ripened peach
  Was never more delicious than her neck.
  Such forms are Nature's favourites.

HEYWOOD.

                                    Come, come--
  Pygmalion and Prometheus dwell within you!
  You poetise her rarely, and exalt
  With goddess-attributes, and chastity
  Beyond most goddesses: be not thus serious!
  If for a passing paramour thou'dst love her,
  Why, so, so it may be well; but never place
  Thy full heart in her hand.

MARLOWE.

                                     I have--I do--
  And I will lay it bleeding at her feet.
  Reason no more, for I do love this woman:
  To me she's chaste, whatever thou hast heard.
  Whatever I may know, hear, find, or fancy,
  I must possess her constantly, or die.

HEYWOOD.

  Nay, if't be thus, I'll fret thine ear no more
  With raven voice; but aid thee all I can.

MARLOWE.

  Cecilia!--Go, dear friend--good Master Heywood,
  Leave me alone--I see her coming thither!

HEYWOOD.

  Bliss wait thy wooing; peace of mind its end!
  (_aside_) His knees shake, and his face and hands are wet,
  As with a sudden fall of dew--God speed him!
  This is a desperate fancy!                         _Exit._

_Enter_ CECILIA.

CECILIA.

                           Thoughtful sir,
  How fare you? Thou'st been reading much of late,
  By the moon's light, I fear me?

MARLOWE.

                              Why so, lady?

CECILIA.

  The reflex of the page is on thy face.

MARLOWE.

  But in my heart the spirit of a shrine
  Burns, with immortal radiation crown'd.

CECILIA.

  Nay, primrose gentleman, think'st me a saint?

MARLOWE.

  I feel thy power.

CECILIA.

                          I exercise no arts--
  Whence is my influence?

MARLOWE.

                         From heaven, I think.
  Madam, I love you--ere to-day you've seen it,
  Although my lips ne'er breathed the word before;
  And seldom as we've met and briefly spoken,
  There are such spiritual passings to and fro
  'Twixt thee and me--though I alone may suffer--
  As make me know this love blends with my life;
  Must branch with it, bud, blossom, put forth fruit,
  Nor end e'en when its last husks strew the grave,
  Whence we together shall ascend to bliss.

CECILIA.

  Continued from this world?

MARLOWE.

                              Thy hand, both hands;
  I kiss them from my soul!

CECILIA.

                             Nay, sir, you burn me--
  Let loose my hands!

MARLOWE.

  I loose them--half my life has thus gone from me!--
  That which is left can scarce contain my heart,
  Now grown too full with the high tide of joy,
  Whose ebb, retiring, fills the caves of sorrow,
  Where Syrens sing beneath their dripping hair,
  And raise the mirror'd fate.

CECILIA.

                             Then, gaze not in it,
  Lest thou should'st see thy passing funeral.
  I would not--I might chance to see far worse.

MARLOWE.

  Thou art too beautiful ever to die!
  I look upon thee, and can ne'er believe it.

CECILIA.

  O, sir--but passion, circumstance, and fate,
  Can do far worse than kill: they can dig graves,
  And make the future owners dance above them,
  Well knowing how 'twill end. Why look you sad?
  'Tis not your case; you are a man in love--
  At least, you say so--and should therefore feel
  A constant sunshine, wheresoe'er you tread,
  Nor think of what's beneath. But speak no more:
  I see a volume gathering in your eye
  Which you would fain have printed in my heart;
  But you were better cast it in the fire.
  Enough you've said, and I enough have listened.

MARLOWE.

  I have said naught.

CECILIA.

                           You have spoken very plain--
  So, Master Marlowe, please you, break we off;
  And, since your mind is now relieved--good day!

MARLOWE.

  Leave me not thus!--forgive me!

CECILIA.

                                   For what offence

MARLOWE.

  The expression of my love.

CECILIA.

                             Tut! that's a trifle.
  Think'st thou I ne'er saw men in love before?
  Unto the summer of beauty they are common
  As grasshoppers.

MARLOWE.

                    And to its winter, lady?

CECILIA.

  There is no winter in my thoughts--adieu!

                                                   _Exit._

MARLOWE.

  She's gone!--How leafless is my life!--My strength
  Seems melted--my breast vacant--and in my brain
  I hear the sound of a retiring sea.

                                                   _Exit._


SCENE II.

                       _Gravel Lane; Bankside._

                   _Enter_ HEYWOOD _and_ MIDDLETON.

MIDDLETON.

  And yet it may end well, after his fit is over.

HEYWOOD.

  But he is earnest in it.

MIDDLETON.

'Tis his habit; a little thunder clears the atmosphere. At present he is
spell-bound, and smouldereth in a hot cloud of passion; but when he once
makes his way, he will soon disperse his free spirit abroad over the
inspired heavens.

HEYWOOD.

I fear me she will sow quick seed of feverish fancies in his mind that
may go near to drive him mad.

MIDDLETON.

How so? He knoweth her for what she is, as well as for what she
was;--the high-spirited and once virtuous wife of the drunkard Bengough.
You remember him?

HEYWOOD.

I have seen him i' the mire. 'Twas his accustomed bed o' nights--and
morning, too--many a time. He preferred _that_ to the angel he left at
home. Some men do. 'Tis a sorrow to think upon.

MIDDLETON.

And one that tears cannot wash! Master Marlowe hath too deep a reading
i' the books of nature to nail his heart upon a gilded weathercock. He
is only desperate after the fashion of a pearl diver. When he hath
enough he will desist--breathe freely, polish the shells, and build
grottoes.

HEYWOOD.

Nay, he persisteth in _not_ knowing her for a courtesan--talks of her
purity in burning words, that seem to glow and enhance his love from his
convictions of her virtue; then suddenly falls into silent abstraction,
looking like a man whose eyes are filled with visions of Paradise. No
pains takes she to deceive him; for he supersedes the chance by
deceiving himself beyond measure. He either listens not at all to
intimation, or insists the contrary.

MIDDLETON.

This is his passionate aggravation or self will: he _must_ know it.

HEYWOOD.

'Tis my belief; but her beauty blinds him with its beams, and drives his
exiled reason into darkness.

MIDDLETON.

Here comes one that could enlighten his perception, methinks.

HEYWOOD.

Who's he? Jack-o'-night, the tavern pander and swashbuckler.

                      _Enter_ JACCONOT.

JACCONOT.

Save ye, my masters; lusty thoughts go with ye, and a jovial full cup
wait on your steps: so shall your blood rise, and honest women pledge ye
in their dreams!

MIDDLETON.

Your weighty-pursed knowledge of women, balanced against your squinting
knowledge of honesty, Master Jack-o'-night, would come down to earth,
methinks, as rapid as a fall from a gallows-tree.

JACCONOT.

Well said, Master Middleton--a merry devil and a long-lived one run
monkey-wise up your back-bone! May your days be as happy as they're
sober, and your nights full of applause! May no brawling mob pelt you,
or your friends, when throned, nor hoot down your plays when your soul's
pinned like a cockchafer on public opinion! May no learned or unlearned
calf write against your knowledge and wit, and no brother paper-stainer
pilfer your pages, and then call you a general thief! Am I the only
rogue and vagabond in the world?

MIDDLETON.

I' faith, not: nay, an' thou wert, there would be no lack of them i' the
next generation. Thou might'st be the father of the race, being now the
bodily type of it. The phases of thy villany are so numerous that, were
they embodied they would break down the fatal tree which is thine
inheritance, and cause a lack of cords for the Thames shipping!

JACCONOT.

  Don't choke me with compliments!

HEYWOOD (_to_ MIDDLETON).

He seems right proud of this multiplied idea of his latter end.

JACCONOT.

Ay; hanging's of high antiquity, and, thereto, of broad modern repute.
The flag, the sign, the fruit, the felon, and other high and mighty
game, all hang; though the sons of ink and sawdust try to stand apart,
smelling civet, as one should say,--faugh! Jewelled caps, ermined
cloaks, powdered wigs, church bells, _bona-roba_ bed-gowns, gilded
bridles, spurs, shields, swords, harness, holy relics, and salted hogs,
all hang in glory! Pictures, too, of rare value! Also music's
ministrants,--the lute, the horn, the fiddle, the pipe, the gong, the
viol, the salt-box, the tambourine and the triangle, make a dead-wall
dream of festive harmonies!

MIDDLETON.

  Infernal discords, thou would'st say!

JACCONOT  (_rapidly_).

These are but few things among many! for 'scutcheons, scarecrows,
proclamations, the bird in a cage, the target for fools' wit, _hic
jacet_ tablets (that is, lying ones), the King's Head and the Queen's
Arms, ropes of onions, dried herbs, smoked fish, holly boughs, hall
lanthorns, framed piety texts, and adored frights of family portraits,
all hang! Likewise corkscrews, cat-skins, glittering trophies, sausage
links, shining icicles, the crucifix, and the skeleton in chains. There,
we all swing, my masters! Tut! hanging's a high Act of Parliament
privilege!--a Star-Chamber Garter-right!

MIDDLETON   (_to_ Heywood _laughingly_).

The devil's seed germinates with reptile rapidity, and blossoms and
fructifies in the vinous fallows of this bully's brain!

JACCONOT.

  I tell thee what----(_looking off_) another time!

                                             _Exit_ JACCONOT _hastily._

HEYWOOD.

  I breathe fresh air!

MIDDLETON.

  Look!--said I not so? See whom 'tis he meets;
  And with a lounging, loose, familiar air,
  Cocking his cap and setting his hand on's hip,
  Salutes with such free language as his action
  And attitude explain!

HEYWOOD.

                           I grieve for Marlowe:
  The more, since 'tis as certain he must have
  Full course of passion, as that its object's full
  Of most unworthy elements.

MIDDLETON.

                             Unworthy,
  Indeed, of such a form, if all be base.
  But Nature, methinks, doth seldom so belie
  The inward by the outward; seldom frame
  A cheat so finish'd to ensnare the senses,
  And break our faith in all substantial truth.   _Exeunt._

            _Enter_ CECILIA, _followed by_ JACCONOT.

JACCONOT.

Well, well, Mistress St. Cecil; the money is all well enough--I object
nothing to the money.

CECILIA.

Then, go your ways.

JACCONOT.

My ways are your ways--a murrain on your beauties!--has your brain shot
forth skylarks as your eyes do sparks?

CECILIA.

Go!--here is my purse.

JACCONOT.

I'll no more of't!--I have a mind to fling back what thou'st already
given me for my services.

CECILIA.

Master Jacconot, I would have no further services from thee. If thou art
not yet satisfied, fetch the weight and scales, and I will cast my gold
into it, and my dross besides--so shall I be doubly relieved.

JACCONOT.

I say again--and the devil bear me fierce witness!--it is not gold I
want, but rightful favour; not silver, but sweet civility; not dross,
but the due respect to my non-pareil value! Bethink thee, Cecil--bethink
thee of many things! Ay! am not I the true gallant of my time? the great
Glow-worm and Will-o'-the-wisp--the life, the fortune, and the favourite
of the brightest among ye!

CECILIA.

Away!

JACCONOT.

Whither?

CECILIA.

Anywhere, so it be distant.

JACCONOT.

What mean'st by discarding me, and why is it? 'Slud! is this the right
sort of return for all my skilful activities, my adroit fascinations of
young lords in drink, my tricks at dice, cards, and dagger-play, not to
speak too loudly of bets on bear-baits, soap-bubbles, and Shrovetide
cocks; or my lies about your beauty and temper? Have I not brought dukes
and earls and reverend seniors, on tip-toe, and softly whispering for
fear of "the world," right under the balcony of your window?--O, don't
beat the dust with your fine foot! These be good services, I think!

CECILIA (_half aside_).

Alas! alas!--the world sees us only as bright, though baleful stars,
little knowing our painful punishments in the dark--our anguish in
secret.

JACCONOT.

Are you thinking of me?

CECILIA.

Go!

JACCONOT.

Go!--a death's-head crown your pillow! May you dream of love, and wake
and see that!

CECILIA.

I had rather see't than you.

JACCONOT.

What's i' the wind,--nobleman, or gentleman, or a brain fancy--am not I
at hand? Are you mad?

CECILIA (_overcome_).

I'd gladly believe I have been so.

JACCONOT.

Good. I'm content you see me aright once more, and acknowledge yourself
wrong.

CECILIA (_half aside, and tearfully_).

O, wrong indeed--very wrong--to my better nature--my better nature.

JACCONOT.

And to me, too! Bethink thee, I say, when last year, after the dance at
Hampton, thou wert enraged against the noble that slighted thee; and,
flushed with wine, thou took'st me by the ear, and mad'st me hand thee
into thy coach, and get in beside thee, with a drawn sword in my hand
and a dripping trencher on my head, singing such songs, until----

CECILIA.

Earthworms and stone walls!

JACCONOT.

Hey! what of them?

CECILIA.

  I would that as the corporal Past they cover,
  They would, at earnest bidding of the will,
  Entomb in walls of darkness and devour
  The hated retrospections of the mind.

JACCONOT (_aside_).

  Oho!--the lamps and saw-dust!--Here's foul play
  And mischief in the market. Preaching varlet!
  I'll find him out--I'll dog him!             _Exit_.

CECILIA.

                                Self disgust
  Gnaws at the root of being, and doth hang
  A heavy sickness on the beams of day,
  Making the atmosphere, which should exalt
  Our contemplations, press us down to earth,
  As though our breath had made it thick with plague.
  Cursed! accursed be the freaks of Nature,
  That mar us from ourselves, and make our acts
  The scorn and loathing of our afterthoughts--
  The finger mark of Conscience, who, most treacherous,
  Wakes to accuse, but slumber'd o'er the sin.

                                               _Exit._


SCENE III.

            _A Room in the Triple Tun, Blackfriars._

            MARLOWE, MIDDLETON, _and_ GENTLEMEN.

GENTLEMAN.

  I do rejoice to find myself among
  The choicest spirits of the age: health, sirs!
  I would commend your fame to future years,
  But that I know ere this ye must be old
  In the conviction, and that ye full oft
  With sure posterity have shaken hands
  Over the unstable bridge of present time.

MARLOWE.

  Not so: we write from the full heart within,
  And leave posterity to find her own.
  Health, sir!--your good deeds laurel you in heaven.

MIDDLETON.

  'Twere best men left their fame to chance and fashion,
  As birds bequeath their eggs to the sun's hatching,
  Since Genius can make no will.

MARLOWE.

                                   Troth, can it!
  But for the consequences of the deed,
  What fires of blind fatality may catch them!
  Say, you do love a woman--do adore her--
  You may embalm the memory of her worth
  And chronicle her beauty to all time,
  In words whereat great Jove himself might flush,
  And feel Olympus tremble at his thoughts;
  Yet where is your security? Some clerk
  Wanting a foolscap, or some boy a kite,
  Some housewife fuel, or some sportsman wadding
  To wrap a ball (which hits the poet's brain
  By merest accident) seizes your record,
  And to the wind thus scatters all your will,
  Or, rather, your will's object. Thus, our pride
  Swings like a planet by a single hair,
  Obedient to God's breath. More wine! more wine!
  I preach--and I grow melancholy--wine!

            _Enter_ DRAWER _with a tankard_.

            A GENTLEMAN (_rising_).

  We're wending homeward--gentlemen, good night!

MARLOWE.

  Not yet--not yet--the night has scarce begun--
  Nay, Master Heywood--Middleton, you'll stay!
  Bright skies to those who go--high thoughts go with ye,
  And constant youth!

GENTLEMEN.

  We thank you, sir--good night! _Exeunt_ GENTLEMEN.

HEYWOOD.

  Let's follow--'tis near morning.

MARLOWE.

                                   Do not go.
  I'm ill at ease, touching a certain matter
  I've taken to heart--don't speak of't--and besides
  I have a sort of horror of my bed.
  Last night a squadron charged me in a dream,
  With Isis and Osiris at the flanks,
  Towering and waving their colossal arms,
  While in the van a fiery chariot roll'd,
  Wherein a woman stood--I knew her well--
  Who seem'd but newly risen from the grave!

  She whirl'd a javelin at me, and methought
  I woke; when, slowly at the foot o' the bed
  The mist-like curtains parted, and upon me
  Did learned Faustus look! He shook his head
  With grave reproof, but more of sympathy,
  As though his past humanity came o'er him--
  Then went away with a low, gushing sigh,
  That startled his own death-cold breast, and seem'd
  As from a marble urn where passion's ashes
  Their sleepless vigil keep. Well--perhaps they do.
                      (_after a pause_)
  Lived he not greatly? Think what was his power!
  All knowledge at his beck--the very Devil
  His common slave. And, O, brought he not back,
  Through the thick-million'd catacombs of ages,
  Helen's unsullied loveliness to his arms?

MIDDLETON.

  So--let us have more wine, then!

HEYWOOD.

                                   Spirit enough
  Springs from thee, Master Marlowe--what need more.

MARLOWE.

  Drawer! lift up thy leaden poppy-head!
  Up man!--where art? The night seems wondrous hot!

            (MARLOWE _throws open a side window that reaches
            down to the floor, and stands there, looking out._)

HEYWOOD (_to_ MIDDLETON).

  The air flows in upon his heated face,
  And he grows pale with looking at the stars;
  Thinking the while of many things in heaven.

MIDDLETON.

  And some one on the earth--as fair to him--
  For, lo you!--is't not she?

                           (_Pointing towards the open window_.)

HEYWOOD.

                               The lady, folded
  In the long mantle, coming down the street?

MIDDLETON.

  Let be; we cannot help him.

                  (HEYWOOD _and_ MIDDLETON _retire apart_--CECILIA
                     _is passing by the open window_.)

MARLOWE.

                                 Stay awhile!--
  One moment stay!

CECILIA (_pausing_).

                    That is not much to ask.

                              (_She steps in through the window_.)

MARLOWE.

  Nor much for you to grant; but O, to me
  That moment is a circle without bounds,--
  Because I see no end to my delight!

CECILIA.

  O, sir, you make me very sad at heart;
  Let's speak no more of this. I am on my way
  To walk beside the river.

MARLOWE.

                             May I come?

CECILIA.

  Ah, no; I'll go alone.

MARLOWE.

                         'Tis dark and dismal;
Nor do I deem it safe!

CECILIA.

                       What can harm _me_?
  If not above, at least I am beyond
  All common dangers. No, you shall not come.
  I have some questions I would ask myself;
  And in the sullen, melancholy flow
  O' the unromantic Thames, that has been witness
  Of many tragical realities,
  Bare of adornment as its cold stone stairs,
  I may find sympathy, if not response.

MARLOWE.

  You find both here. I know thy real life;
  We do not see the truth--or, O, how little!
  Pure light sometimes through painted windows streams;
  And, when all's dark around thee, thou art fair!
  Thou bear'st within an ever-burning lamp,
  To me more sacred than a vestal's shrine;
  For she may be of heartless chastity,
  False in all else, and proud of her poor ice,
  As though 'twere fire suppress'd; but thou art good
  For goodness' sake;--true-hearted, lovable,
  For truth and honour's sake; and such a woman,
  That man who wins, the gods themselves may envy.

CECILIA (_going_).

  Considering all things, this is bitter sweet.

MARLOWE.

And I may come? (_following her_)

CECILIA (_firmly_).

               You shall not.

MARLOWE.

                              I obey you.

CECILIA (_tenderly_).

  Ah! Kit Marlowe,--
  You think too much of me--and of yourself
  Too little!

MARLOWE.

             Then I may----(_advancing_)

CECILIA (_firmly_).

                            No--no!

MARLOWE.

                                    Wilt promise
  To see me for one "good night" ere you sleep?

CECILIA.

  On my way home I will.

          (_She turns to look at him--then steps through the
              Window--Exit_.)

MARLOWE.

                        Be sure--be sure!

(HEYWOOD _and_ MIDDLETON _approach_.)

HEYWOOD.

Now, Marlowe!--you desert us!

MARLOWE.

                              Say not so;--
  Or, saying so, add--that I have lost myself!
  Nay, but I _have_; yonder I go in the dark!
                                (_pointing after_ CECILIA)

       _Street Music._--JACCONOT, _singing outside._

              Ram out the link, boys; ho, boys![685]
                There's daylight in the sky!
              While the trenchers strew the floor,
              And the worn-out grey beards snore,
                Jolly throats continue dry!
                        Ram out the link, boys, &c.

MIDDLETON.

What voice is that?

MARLOWE (_through his teeth_).

                     From one of the hells.

HEYWOOD.

The roystering singer approaches.

           _Enter_ JACCONOT, _with a full tankard._

JACCONOT.

Ever awake and shining, my masters! and here am I, your twin lustre,
always ready to herald and anoint your pleasures, like a true Master of
the Revels. I ha' just stepped over the drawer's body, laid nose and
heels together on the door-mat, asleep, and here's wherewith to continue
the glory!

MIDDLETON.

  We need not your help.

HEYWOOD.

  We thank you, Jack-o'-night: we would be alone.

JACCONOT.

What say _you_, Master Marlowe? you look as grim as a sign-painters'
first sketch on a tavern bill, after his ninth tankard.

MIDDLETON.

  Cease your death-rattle, night-hawk!

MARLOWE.

  That's well said.

JACCONOT.

Is it? So 'tis my gallants--a night-bird like yourselves, am I.

MARLOWE.

  Beast!--we know you.

JACCONOT.

Your merry health, Master Kit Marlowe! I'll bring a loud pair of palms
to cheer your soul the next time you strut in red paint with a wooden
weapon at your thigh.

MARLOWE.

  Who sent for _you_, dorr-hawk?--go!

JACCONOT.

Go! Aha!--I remember the word--same tone, same gesture--or as like as
the two profiles of a monkey, or as two squeaks for one pinch. Go!--not
I--here's to all your healths! One pull more! There, I've done--take it,
Master Marlowe; and pledge me as the true knight of London's rarest
beauties!

MARLOWE.

  I will!       (_Dashes the tankard at his head_.)

JACCONOT (_stooping quickly_).

A miss, 'fore-gad!--the wall has got it! See where it trickles down like
the long robe of some dainty fair one! And look you here--and there
again, look you!--what make you of the picture he hath presented?

MARLOWE (_staggers as he stares at the wall_).

  O subtle Nature! who hath so compounded
  Our senses, playing into each other's wheels,
  That feeling oft acts substitute for sight,
  As sight becomes obedient to the thought--
  How canst thou place such wonders at the mercy
  Of every wretch that crawls? I feel--I see!

           (_Street Music as before, but farther off._)

JACCONOT (_singing_).

          Ram out the link, boys; ho, boys!
            The blear-eyed morning's here;
          Let us wander through the streets,
          And kiss whoe'er one meets;
            St. Cecil is my dear!
                Ram out the link, boys, &c.

MARLOWE (_drawing_).

  Lightning come up from hell and strangle thee!

MIDDLETON _and_ HEYWOOD.

  Nay, Marlowe! Marlowe!   (_they hold him back_).

MIDDLETON (_to_ JACCONOT).

  Away, thou bestial villain!

JACCONOT (_singing at_ MARLOWE).

         St. Cecil is my dear!

MARLOWE (_furiously_).

                          Blast! blast and scatter
  Thy body to ashes! Off! I'll have his ghost!

  (_rushes at_ JACCONOT--_they fight--Marlowe disarms him; but_ JACCONOT
  _wrests_ MARLOWE'S _own sword from his hand, and stabs him_--MARLOWE
  _falls_)

MIDDLETON.

  See! see!

MARLOWE (_clasping his forehead_).

  Who's down?--answer me, friends--is't I?--
  Or in the maze of some delirious trance,
  Some realm unknown, or passion newly born--
  Ne'er felt before--am I transported thus?
  My fingers paddle, too, in blood--is't mine?

JACCONOT.

O, content you, Master Marplot--it's you that's down, drunk or sober;
and that's your own blood on your fingers, running from a three-inch
groove in your ribs for the devil's imps to slide into you. Ugh! cry
gramercy! for it's all over with your rhyming!

HEYWOOD.

  O, heartless mischief!

MIDDLETON.

                          Hence, thou rabid cur!

MARLOWE.

  What demon in the air with unseen arm
  Hath turn'd my unchain'd fury against myself?
  Recoiling dragon! thy resistless force
  Scatters thy mortal master in his pride,
  To teach him, with self-knowledge, to fear thee.
  Forgetful of all corporal conditions,
  My passion hath destroy'd me!

JACCONOT.

No such matter; it was _my_ doing. You shouldn't ha' ran at me in that
fashion with a real sword--I thought it had been one o' your sham ones.

MIDDLETON.

  Away!

HEYWOOD.

                   See! his face changes--lift him up!
                             (_they raise and support him_)
  Here--place your hand upon his side--here, here--
  Close over mine, and staunch the flowing wound!

MARLOWE (_delirious_.)

  Bright is the day--the air with glory teems--
  And eagles wanton in the smile of Jove:
  Can these things be, and Marlowe live no more!
  O Heywood! Heywood! I had a world of hopes
  About that woman--now in my heart they rise
  Confused, as flames from my life's coloured map,
  That burns until with wrinkling agony
  Its ashes flatten, separate, and drift
  Through gusty darkness. Hold me fast by the arm!
  A little aid will save me:--See! she's here!
  I clasp thy form--I feel thy breath, my love--
  And know thee for a sweet saint come to save me!
  Save!--is it death I feel--it cannot be death?

JACCONOT (_half aside_.)

Marry, but it can!--or else your sword's a foolish dog that dar'n't bite
his owner.

MARLOWE.

  O friends--dear friends--this is a sorry end--
  A most unworthy end! To think--O God!--
  To think that I should fall by the hand of one
  Whose office, like his nature, is all baseness,
  Gives Death ten thousand stings, and to the Grave
  A damning victory! Fame sinks with life!
  A galling--shameful--ignominious end! (_sinks down_).
  O mighty heart! O full and orbed heart,
  Flee to thy kindred sun, rolling on high!
  Or let the hoary and eternal sea
  Sweep me away, and swallow body and soul!

JACCONOT.

There'll be no "encore" to either, I wot; for thou'st led an ill life,
Master Marlowe; and so the sweet Saint thou spok'st of, will remain my
fair game--behind the scenes.

MARLOWE.

  Liar! slave! sla---- Kind Master Heywood,
  You will not see me die thus!--thus by the hand
  And maddening tongue of such a beast as that!
  Haste, if you love me--fetch a leech to help me--
  Here--Middleton--sweet friend--a bandage here--
  I cannot die by such a hand--I will not--
  I say I will not die by that vile hand!
  Go bring Cecilia to me--bring the leech--
  Close--close this wound--you know I did it myself--
  Bring sweet Cecilia--haste--haste--instantly--
  Bring life and time--bring heaven!--Oh, I am dying!--
  Some water--stay beside me--maddening death,
  By such a hand! O villain! from the grave
  I constantly will rise--to curse! curse! curse thee!
                                   (_Rises_--_and falls dead_.)

MIDDLETON.

  Terrible end!

HEYWOOD.

                 O God!--he is quite gone!

JACCONOT (_aghast_.)

'Twas dreadful--'twas! Christ help us! and lull him to sleep in's grave.
I stand up for mine own nature none the less. (_Voices without_) What
noise is that?

_Enter_ OFFICERS.

CHIEF OFFICER.

This is our man--ha! murder has been here! You are our prisoner--the
gallows waits you!

JACCONOT.

What have I done to be hung up like a miracle? The hemp's not sown nor
the ladder-wood grown, that shall help fools to finish me! He did it
himself! He said so with his last words!--there stands his friends and
brother players--put them to their Testament if he said not he did it
himself?

CHIEF OFFICER.

  Who is it lies here?--methinks that I should know him,
  But for the fierce distortion of his face!

MIDDLETON.

  He who erewhile wrote with a brand of fire,
  Now, in his passionate blood, floats tow'rds the grave!
  The present time is ever ignorant--
  We lack clear vision in our self-love's maze;
  But Marlowe in the future will stand great,
  Whom this--the lowest caitiff in the world--
  A nothing, save in grossness, hath destroy'd.

JACCONOT.

"Caitiff" back again in your throat! and "gross nothing" to boot--may
you have it to live upon for a month, and die mad and starving! Would'st
swear my life away so lightly? Tut! who was he? I could always find the
soundings of a quart tankard, or empty a pasty in half his time, and
swear as rare oaths between whiles--who was he? I too ha' write my odes
and Pindar jigs with the twinkling of a bedpost, to the sound of the
harp and hurdygurdy, while Capricornus wagged his fiery beard; I ha'
sung songs to the faint moon's echoes at daybreak and danced here away
and there away, like the lightning through a forest! As to your sword
and dagger play, I've got the trick o' the eye and wrist--who was he?
What's all his gods--his goddesses and lies?--the first a'nt worth a
word; and for the two last, I was always a prince of both! "Caitiff!"
and "beast!" and "nothing!"--who was he?

CHIEF OFFICER.

  You're ours, for sundry villanies committed,
  Sufficient each to bring your vice to an end;
  The law hath got you safely in its grasp!

JACCONOT (_after a pause_).

Then may Vice and I sit crown'd in heaven, while Law and Honesty stalk
damned through hell! Now do I see the thing very
plain!--treachery--treachery, my masters! I know the jade that hath
betrayed me--I know her. 'Slud! who cares? She was a fine woman, too--a
rare person--and a good spirit; but there's an end of all now--she's
turned foolish and virtuous, and a tell-tale, and I am to be turned to
dust through it--long, long before my time: and these princely limbs
must go make a dirt-pie--build up a mud hut--or fatten an alderman's
garden! There! calf-heads--there's a lemon for your mouths! Heard'st
ever such a last dying speech and confession! Write it in red ochre on a
sheet of Irish, and send it to Mistress Cecily for a death-winder. I
know what you've got against me--and I know you all deserve just the
same yourselves--but lead on, my masters!

                                     _Exeunt_ JACCONOT _and_ OFFICERS.

MIDDLETON.

  O Marlowe! canst thou rise with power no more?
  Can greatness die thus?

HEYWOOD (_bending over the body.)_

                           Miserable sight!

                (_A shriek outside the house_).

MIDDLETON.

   That cry!--what may that mean?

HEYWOOD (_as if awaking_).

                                  I hear no cry.

MIDDLETON.

  What is't comes hither, like a gust of wind?

                      CECILIA _rushes in_.

CECILIA.

  Where--where? O, then, 'tis true--and he is dead!
  All's over now--there's nothing in the world--
  For he who raised my heart up from the dust,
  And show'd me noble lights in mine own soul,
  Has fled my gratitude and growing love--
  I never knew how deep it was till now!
  Through me, too!--do not curse me!--I was the cause--
  Yet do not curse me--No! no! not the cause,
  But that it happen'd so. This is the reward
  Of Marlowe's love!--why, why did I delay?
  O, gentlemen, pray for me! I have been
  Lifted in heavenly air--and suddenly
  The arm that placed me, and with strength sustain'd me,
  Is snatch'd up, starward: I can neither follow,
  Nor can I touch the gross earth any more!
  Pray for me, gentlemen!--but breathe no blessings--
  Let not a blessing sweeten your dread prayers--
  I wish no blessings--nor could bear their weight;
  For I am left, I know not where or how:
  But, pray for me--my soul is buried here.

                                 (_Sinks down upon the body._)

MIDDLETON.

  "Cut is the branch that might have grown full straight,
  And burned is Apollo's laurel bough!"

                                             (_Solemn music._)


Dark Curtain.

FOOTNOTES:

[685] The inverted iron horns or tubes, a few of which still remain on
lamp-posts and gates, were formerly used as extinguishers to the torches
which were thrust into them.




INDEX TO THE NOTES.


  affects, iii. 60
  again, ii. 161
  a-good, ii. 49
  air of life, ii. 217
  Albertus, i. 220.
  Alcides' post, i. 105
  a-life, iii. 175
  Alleyn, Edward, ii. 6
  Almain rutters, i. 112
  amorous, i. 121
  Antwerp, blockade of, i. 217
  aphorisms, i. 213
  appointed, ii. 190
  approve, iii. 263
  Aquarius, iii. 279
  _Arden of Feversham_, quoted, ii. 89
  argins, i. 149
  Ariosto, incident taken from, i. 177
  artier, i. 45
  axes, iii. 255
  azur'd, i. 276

  bable, iii. 299
  Badgeth, i. 115
  baiting, iii. 99
  ballace, ii. 335
  bandy, ii. 125
  Banks' horse, iii. 232
  Barabas' nose, ii. 47
  basilisks, i. 67
  bassoes, i. 48
  bastones, i. 57
  bevers, i. 246
  bezzling, iii. 247
  bid a base, ii. 191
  bill, i. 213
  bird-bolt, iii. 96
  blazing star, iii. 225
  block, iii. 226
  blubbered, i. 85
  bombards, ii. 105
  border, iii. 129
  boss, i. 62
  Boulogne, taking of, iii. 224
  Bourne, Vincent, his _Cantatrices_, iii. 238
  bousing-glass, iii. 247
  brave, i. 21
  braves, ii. 175
  Brest, expedition against, iii. 239
  Britainy, ii. 10
  bugs, i. 164
  bullets wrapt in fire, ii. 40
  burn, iii. 234
  by, ii. 14

  Cadiz, expedition against, iii. 48
  carbonadoes, i. 79
  case, i. 246
  cast, ii. 165
  Catullus imitated, iii. 89
  catzery, ii. 89
  cavaliero, i. 141
  cazzo, ii. 75
  centronel, ii. 328
  champion, i. 32
  channel (collar-bone), i. 125
  channel (gutter), ii. 127
  cleapt, iii. 98
  cleys, iii. 279
  clift, i. 206
  clout, i. 37
  coated, iii. 314
  coll, ii. 354
  colts, i. 180
  competitor, i. 25
  confits, iii. 85
  convertite, ii. 22
  counterfeit, i. 51
  counterscarfs, iii. 228
  covent, ii. 78
  covered way, i. 149
  Creusa's crown, allusion to, ii. 207
  cross, ii. 52
  cross-biting, ii. 89
  cullions, ii. 148
  curst, iii. 225
  custom, ii. 13
  cypress, iii. 51

  Damasco, i. 84
  Damascus walls, i. 87
  damned, i. 204
  dang'd, iii. 37
  Daniel, Samuel, allusions to, iii. 232, 242
  debasement of coinage, iii. 225
  defend, ii. 272
  deserved, ii. 190
  Devil (he that eats with the Devil had need of a long spoon), ii. 67
  die, ii. 119
  Dis, iii. 36
  discoloured, iii. 10
  dittany, ii. 205
  double cannons, i. 252
  Drayton, Michael, allusion to, iii. 228

  earns, ii. 202
  ecues, ii. 244
  elephant, object of wonder, iii. 217
  Elze, Dr. Karl, emendation by, ii. 364
  enginous, iii. 52
  entrance, ii. 252
  erring, i. 223
  exercise, ii. 84
  exhibition, ii. 280
  exocoetus, ii. 154
  eyas, iii. 62
  eye, by the, ii. 68
  eyelids of the day, ii. 38

  falc'nets, i. 152
  false-brays, iii. 228
  fancy, ii. 339
  far-fet, ii. 344
  favour, iii. 97
  fawns, iii. 92
  fet, iii. 268
  few, in, ii. 68
  fleering, ii. 161
  fleet, i. 61
  flour, iii. 11
  flying-fish, ii. 154
  foil (check), i. 64
  foil (stain), i. 170
  foreslow, ii. 167
  frost of 1564, iii. 224

  gabions, i. 154
  garboils, iii. 255
  Gascoigne, George, iii. 226
  gaunt, iii. 236
  gear, i. 31
  give arms, i. 164
  glorious, i. 70
  gobbets, iii. 111
  grate, iii. 215
  guess, i. 313
  Guilpin's _Skialetheia_ quoted, iii. 214, 238
  Guise, the, ii. 9

  had I wist, ii. 172
  halcyon's bill, ii. 12
  Hammon, Master Thomas, ii. 4
  Harington, Sir John, his _Ajax_, iii. 231;
    his dog Bungey, iii. 245
  harness, ii. 324
  Hatton, Sir Christopher, his monument, iii. 217
  haught, ii. 176
  Havre, expedition against, iii. 224
  hay, ii. 122
  head (to head, to head!), iii. 241
  hebon, ii. 68
  held in hand, ii. 61
  Hermoso piarer, etc., ii. 38
  het, iii. 47
  hey-pass, i. 266
  Heywood, John, iii. 231
  hold a wolf by the ears, ii. 212
  horsebread, i. 257
  horse-courser, i. 264
  hugy, i. 59
  Hunkes, Harry, iii. 242

  I, old spelling for _ay_, i. 78. (The form _I_ has been retained,
    perhaps unnecessarily, throughout.)
  imbast, iii. 192
  impartial, ii. 60
  imperance, iii. 55
  imprecations, i. 85
  incontinent, i. 11
  incony, ii. 93
  injury (verb), i. 16
  intire, iii. 49
  investion, i. 16
  ippocras, i. 256
  Irish kerns, ii. 160

  jesses, ii. 155
  jig, ii. 161
  John the Great, i. 128
  Jubalter, i. 128
  Judas, ii. 95

  keend, ii. 372
  keep, ii. 245
  Knave's acre, i. 229
  knights of the post, iii. 128
  known of, i. 266

  lake, ii. 226
  lanch, i. 22
  Lantchidol, i. 114
  lawnds, ii. 312
  leaguer, i. 127
  leave, ii. 327
  Lepidus, his printed dog, iii. 245
  let, i. 80
  liefest, ii. 373
  lightly borne, iii. 107
  linstock, ii. 107
  Lopez, Doctor, i. 266
  love-lock, iii. 226
  lown, ii. 135

  mails, i. 22
  malgrado, ii. 169
  malice (verb), i. 15
  mandrake juice, ii. 99
  March beer, i. 247
  Martlemas beef, i. 247
  mate, i. 13, 211
  measures, i. 188
  merchants, i. 24
  mere, iii. 44
  merit, iii. 266
  Milton quoted, ii. 38; iii. 22
  minions, i. 152
  miss, i. 173
  Mithridate, i. 89
  moorish fool, iii. 50
  More, Sir Thomas, allusion to a Latin epigram by, iii. 235
  Moroccus, i. 58
  mottoes at the end of plays, i. 283
  Mount Falcon, ii. 253
  mounted his chariot, i. 183
  muschatoes, ii. 84
  Muse (masculine), i. 211
  muted, iii. 241

  neck-verse, ii. 83
  need, i. 119
  nepenthe, iii. 234
  nephew, ii. 329
  no way but one, i. 92
  nymph, ii. 360

  old Edward, ii. 218
  on cai me on, i. 213
  ostry, i. 267
  other some, iii. 85
  Ovid imitated, i. 25
  packed, ii. 359
  paised, iii. 25
  parbreak, i. 95
  Paris-Garden, iii. 241
  pash, i. 59
  pass, i. 13
  Paul's churchyard, iii. 251
  Paul's steeple struck by lightning, iii. 225
  pentacle, iii. 45
  Perkins, Richard, ii. 6.
  Petrarch's _Itinerarium Syriacum_ quoted, i. 250
  pheres, iii. 66
  pickadevaunts, i. 228
  pilling, i. 65
  pin, i. 37
  pioners, i. 50
  pitch, i. 28
  places, ii. 258
  plage, i. 83
  plat, iii. 81
  plates, ii. 44
  platform, ii. 363
  Plato's year, i. 74
  play the man, i. 159
  play-houses, hours of performance at, iii. 238.
  Pont Neuf, iii. 236
  porcupine darting her quills, ii. 121
  port, i. 30
  portagues, ii. 28
  prest, i. 116
  pretend (_i.e._ portend), ii. 64
  pretend (_i.e._ intend), ii. 104
  prevail, i. 141
  prize played, ii. 7
  proin, iii. 66
  prorex, i. 12
  purchase, i. 42
  put by, iii. 17

  quenchless, ii. 323
  qui mihi discipulus, i. 229
  quit, ii. 367
  quite, ii. 282
  quod tumeraris, i. 224

  racking, i. 179
  ray, iii. 180
  ream, ii. 88
  rebated, i. 177
  reflex, i. 50
  regiment, i. 13
  renied, Christians, i. 48
  renowned, i. 24
  resolve, i. 13
  respect, ii. 142
  retorqued, i. 94
  Rhamnus, i. 35
  Rhodes, i. 212
  ringled, iii. 29
  rising in the North, iii. 224
  rivelled, ii. 334; iii. 124
  Rivo-Castiliano, ii. 92
  road, ii. 160
  rod, i. 122
  rombelow, with a, ii. 161
  ruinate, ii. 244
  run division, ii. 88
  running banquet, ii. 86
  rushes, rooms strewed with, iii. 27

  Sabans, ii. 11
  Sackarson, iii. 242
  St. Quentin, storming of, iii. 224
  sakers, i. 152
  sarell, i. 58
  saunce, iii. 127
  saying, ii. 44
  scald, i. 31
  scambled, ii. 16
  scenes, i. 215
  scholarism, i. 212
  schright, iii. 275
  sciomancy, i. 218
  sect, ii. 28
  set, ii. 249
  Seven deadly Sins, i. 245
  shadow, ii. 175
  Shakespeare quoted, i. 16, 18, 25, 29, 31, 46, 92, 97, 167, 254, 266,
    275; ii. 12, 16, 36, 37, 40, 41, 44, 60, 68, 84, 86, 99, 128, 142,
    158, 193, 218, 228, 304, 326; iii. 9, 12, 15, 24, 27, 31, 41, 50, 65,
    89, 234
  shaver, ii. 45
  Shelley quoted, i. 155, 206
  shine, iii. 106
  silverlings, ii. 11
  Skelton imitated, iii. 59
  slick, i. 265
  slop, i. 230
  slubber, iii. 65
  smell-feast, iii. 239
  snicle, ii. 92
  soil, ii. 343
  sollars, ii. 76
  sometimes, ii. 31
  sonnet, i. 253
  sort, ii. 288
  souse, iii. 264
  Spenser quoted in _Tamburlaine_, i. 183. (I neglected to point out
  that in i. 173, "As when an herd of lusty Cymbrian bulls," &c., there
  is an imitation of a passage of the _Faerie Queene_, Book I. canto
  viii.--

    "As great a noyse, as when in Cymbrian plaine
    An heard of Bulles, whom kindly rage doth sting
    Do for the milkie mothers want complaine,
    And fill the fields with troublous bellowing,
    The neighbour woods around with hollow murmur ring.")

  spials, i. 32
  sprung, iii. 64
  staring up, hair, iii. 89
  stated, ii. 39
  states, i. 14
  statua, i. 142
  stature, i. 74
  staves acre, i. 229
  stems, i. 24
  stern, ii. 365
  stomach, ii. 129
  stools on the stage, iii. 215
  stoops, i. 169
  strain, i. 155
  subject, i. 203
  supprised, ii. 306
  sure, made, ii. 50
  sweating sickness, iii. 224

  taint, i. 122
  take in, iii. 239
  talents, i. 46
  tall, i. 167
  _tanti_, ii. 120
  taxing private, iii. 213
  Theatre and Curtain playhouses, iii. 218
  Theocritus imitated, iii. 61
  thirling, iii. 9
  tho, iii. 107
  three for one, iii. 240
  timeless, ii. 128
  tires, i. 47
  to, ii. 74
  tobacco, Bobadil's encomium of, iii. 235
  tobacco smoked on the stage, iii. 231
  topless, i. 275
  tottered, ii. 89
  toy, iii. 86
  train, ii. 183
  trannels, iii. 134
  Trier, i. 250
  true, true, ii. 127
  Turk of tenpence, ii. 84
  twigger, ii. 362
  Tyrone's insurrection, iii. 244

  unresisted, ii. 339
  unvalued, i. 18
  ure, ii. 48

  vail, ii. 39
  valure, iii. 80
  valurous, i. 20
  Vanity, Lady, ii. 45
  vaut, i. 23
  villainese, i. 95
  villainy, i. 52
  Vulcan's dancing, ii. 304

  wagers laid about actors, ii. 7
  wall'd in, ii. 304
  water-work at London Bridge, iii. 217
  watery star, iii. 9
  when? ii. 63
  when? can you tell? ii. 171
  while, i. 80
  whist, ii. 349
  Wigmore, ii. 162
  will, i. 136
  winter's tale, ii. 36

  Wordsworth, his _Power of Music_, iii. 238
  wreaks, iii. 160

  Zoacum, i. 135


PRINTED BY BALLANTYNE, HANSON AND CO.
       EDINBURGH AND LONDON.




Transcriber's Notes:


Page 164:
In amicam, quod abortivum ipsa fecrrit.
Typo for fecerit. Changed.

Footnote 350: Not in Islam.
Typo for 'Isham' as elsewhere. Changed.

Footnote 381: So eds. B, C.--Islam.
Typo for 'Isham'. Changed.

Footnote 462:    In his close nips describde a gull to thee:
Possible typo 'describde for described'. Unchanged.

Page 272:
Or, dropping-ripe, ready to fall with urin.
Probable typo for ruin. Changed.

Page 351:
a'nt for ain't. Unchanged.

Various:
u and v may be reversed.
i and j may be reversed.

The index applies to all three volumes.

Elegia V missing. See Footnote 368.


The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Collected Works in Verse and Prose of William Butler Yeats, Vol. 8 (of 8)

This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Collected Works in Verse and Prose of William Butler Yeats, Vol. 8 (of 8)

Author: W. B. Yeats

Release date: August 5, 2015 [eBook #49615]
                Most recently updated: October 24, 2024

Language: English

Credits: Produced by Emmy, mollypit and the Online Distributed
        Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This file was
        produced from images generously made available by The
        Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COLLECTED WORKS IN VERSE AND PROSE OF WILLIAM BUTLER YEATS, VOL. 8 (OF 8) ***

THE COLLECTED WORKS OF WILLIAM BUTLER YEATS




    DISCOVERIES. EDMUND SPENSER.
    POETRY AND TRADITION; & OTHER
    ESSAYS:: BEING THE EIGHTH VOLUME
    OF THE COLLECTED WORKS IN VERSE
    & PROSE OF WILLIAM BUTLER YEATS :: IMPRINTED
    AT THE SHAKESPEARE
    HEAD PRESS STRATFORD-ON-AVON
    MCMVIII




CONTENTS


                                                           PAGE
    DISCOVERIES:
      PROPHET, PRIEST AND KING                                3
      PERSONALITY AND THE INTELLECTUAL ESSENCES               8
      THE MUSICIAN AND THE ORATOR                            12
      A GUITAR PLAYER                                        13
      THE LOOKING-GLASS                                      14
      THE TREE OF LIFE                                       15
      THE PRAISE OF OLD WIVES TALES                         18
      THE PLAY OF MODERN MANNERS                             20
      HAS THE DRAMA OF CONTEMPORARY LIFE A ROOT OF ITS OWN?  22
      WHY THE BLIND MAN IN ANCIENT TIMES WAS MADE A POET     24
      CONCERNING SAINTS AND ARTISTS                          29
      THE SUBJECT MATTER OF DRAMA                            32
      THE TWO KINDS OF ASCETICISM                            36
      IN THE SERPENTS MOUTH                                 38
      THE BLACK AND THE WHITE ARROWS                         39
      HIS MISTRESSS EYEBROWS                                39
      THE TRESSES OF THE HAIR                                41
      A TOWER ON THE APENNINE                                42
      THE THINKING OF THE BODY                               43
      RELIGIOUS BELIEF NECESSARY TO SYMBOLIC ART             45
      THE HOLY PLACES                                        48
    EDMUND SPENSER                                           51
    POETRY AND TRADITION                                     91
    MODERN IRISH POETRY                                     113
    LADY GREGORYS CUCHULAIN OF MUIRTHEMNE                  131
    LADY GREGORYS GODS AND FIGHTING MEN                    147
    MR. SYNGE AND HIS PLAYS                                 171
    LIONEL JOHNSON                                          183
    THE PATHWAY                                             189

    BIBLIOGRAPHY                                            197




DISCOVERIES




PROPHET, PRIEST AND KING


THE little theatrical company I write my plays for had come to a west
of Ireland town, and was to give a performance in an old ball-room, for
there was no other room big enough. I went there from a neighbouring
country-house, and, arriving a little before the players, tried to open
a window. My hands were black with dirt in a moment, and presently a
pane of glass and a part of the window-frame came out in my hands.
Everything in this room was half in ruins, the rotten boards cracked
under my feet, and our new proscenium and the new boards of the
platform looked out of place, and yet the room was not really old, in
spite of the musicians gallery over the stage. It had been built by
some romantic or philanthropic landlord some three or four generations
ago, and was a memory of we knew not what unfinished scheme.

From there I went to look for the players, and called for information
on a young priest, who had invited them and taken upon himself the
finding of an audience. He lived in a high house with other priests,
and as I went in I noticed with a whimsical pleasure a broken pane of
glass in the fanlight over the door, for he had once told me the story
of an old woman who a good many years ago quarrelled with the bishop,
got drunk and hurled a stone through the painted glass. He was a clever
man who read Meredith and Ibsen, but some of his books had been packed
in the fire-grate by his housekeeper, instead of the customary view of
an Italian lake or the coloured tissue-paper. The players, who had been
giving a performance in a neighbouring town, had not yet come, or were
unpacking their costumes and properties at the hotel he had recommended
them. We should have time, he said, to go through the half-ruined
town and to visit the convent schools and the cathedral, where, owing
to his influence, two of our young Irish sculptors had been set to
carve an altar and the heads of pillars. I had only heard of this
work, and I found its strangeness and simplicityone of them had been
Rodins pupilcould not make me forget the meretriciousness of the
architecture and the commercial commonplace of the inlaid pavements.
The new movement had seized on the cathedral midway in its growth, and
the worst of the old and the best of the new were side by side without
any sign of transition. The convent school was, as other like places
have been to mea long room in a workhouse hospital at Portumna, in
particulara delight to the imagination and the eyes. A new floor had
been put into some ecclesiastical building and the light from a great
mullioned window, cut off at the middle, fell aslant upon rows of clean
and seemingly happy children. The nuns, who show in their own convents,
where they can put what they like, a love of what is mean and pretty,
make beautiful rooms where the regulations compel them to do all with
a few colours and a few flowers. I think it was that day, but am not
sure, that I had lunch at a convent and told fairy stories to a couple
of nuns, and I hope it was not mere politeness that made them seem to
have a childs interest in such things.

A good many of our audience, when the curtain went up in the old
ball-room, were drunk, but all were attentive, for they had a great
deal of respect for my friend, and there were other priests there.
Presently the man at the door opposite to the stage strayed off
somewhere and I took his place, and when boys came up offering two or
three pence and asking to be let into the sixpenny seats, I let them
join the melancholy crowd. The play professed to tell of the heroic
life of ancient Ireland, but was really full of sedentary refinement
and the spirituality of cities. Every emotion was made as dainty-footed
and dainty-fingered as might be, and a love and pathos where passion
had faded into sentiment, emotions of pensive and harmless people,
drove shadowy young men through the shadows of death and battle. I
watched it with growing rage. It was not my own work, but I have
sometimes watched my own work with a rage made all the more salt in
the mouth from being half despair. Why should we make so much noise
about ourselves and yet have nothing to say that was not better said
in that workhouse dormitory, where a few flowers and a few coloured
counterpanes and the coloured walls had made a severe and gracious
beauty? Presently the play was changed and our comedian began to act
a little farce, and when I saw him struggle to wake into laughter
an audience, out of whom the life had run as if it were water, I
rejoiced, as I had over that broken window-pane. Here was something
secular, abounding, even a little vulgar, for he was gagging horribly,
condescending to his audience, though not without contempt.

We had supper in the priests house, and a government official, who
had come down from Dublin, partly out of interest in this attempt to
educate the people, and partly because it was his holiday and it was
necessary to go somewhere, entertained us with little jokes. Somebody,
not, I think, a priest, talked of the spiritual destiny of our race
and praised the nights work, for the play was refined and the people
really very attentive, and he could not understand my discontent; but
presently he was silenced by the patter of jokes.

I had my breakfast by myself the next morning, for the players had got
up in the middle of the night and driven some ten miles to catch an
early train to Dublin, and were already on their way to their shops and
offices. I had brought the visitors book of the hotel, to turn over
its pages while waiting for my bacon and eggs, and found several pages
full of obscenities, scrawled there some two or three weeks before,
by Dublin visitors, it seemed, for a notorious Dublin street was
mentioned. Nobody had thought it worth his while to tear out the page
or block out the lines, and as I put the book away impressions that
had been drifting through my mind for months rushed up into a single
thought. If we poets are to move the people, we must reintegrate the
human spirit in our imagination. The English have driven away the
kings, and turned the prophets into demagogues, and you cannot have
health among a people if you have not prophet, priest and king.




PERSONALITY AND THE INTELLECTUAL ESSENCES


MY work in Ireland has continually set this thought before me: How
can I make my work mean something to vigorous and simple men whose
attention is not given to art but to a shop, or teaching in a National
School, or dispensing medicine? I had not wanted to elevate them
or educate them, as these words are understood, but to make them
understand my vision, and I had not wanted a large audience, certainly
not what is called a national audience, but enough people for what is
accidental and temporary to lose itself in the lump. In England, where
there have been so many changing activities and so much systematic
education, one only escapes from crudities and temporary interests
among students, but here there is the right audience could one but get
its ears. I have always come to this certainty: what moves natural
men in the arts is what moves them in life, and that is, intensity of
personal life, intonations that show them in a book or a play, the
strength, the essential moment of a man who would be exciting in the
market or at the dispensary door. They must go out of the theatre with
the strength they live by strengthened with looking upon some passion
that could, whatever its chosen way of life, strike down an enemy, fill
a long stocking with money or move a girls heart. They have not much
to do with the speculations of science, though they have a little,
or with the speculations of metaphysics, though they have a little.
Their legs will tire on the road if there is nothing in their hearts
but vague sentiment, and though it is charming to have an affectionate
feeling about flowers, that will not pull the cart out of the ditch.
An exciting person, whether the hero of a play or the maker of poems,
will display the greatest volume of personal energy, and this energy
must seem to come out of the body as out of the mind. We must say to
ourselves continually when we imagine a character: Have I given him
the roots, as it were, of all faculties necessary for life? And only
when one is certain of that may one give him the one faculty that fills
the imagination with joy. I even doubt if any play had ever a great
popularity that did not use, or seem to use, the bodily energies of its
principal actor to the full. Villon the robber could have delighted
these Irishmen with plays and songs, if he and they had been born to
the same traditions of word and symbol, but Shelley could not; and
as men came to live in towns and to read printed books and to have
many specialised activities, it has become more possible to produce
Shelleys and less and less possible to produce Villons. The last Villon
dwindled into Robert Burns because the highest faculties had faded,
taking the sense of beauty with them, into some sort of vague heaven
and left the lower to lumber where they best could. In literature,
partly from the lack of that spoken word which knits us to normal man,
we have lost in personality, in our delight in the whole manblood,
imagination, intellect, running togetherbut have found a new delight,
in essences, in states of mind, in pure imagination, in all that comes
to us most easily in elaborate music. There are two ways before
literatureupward into ever-growing subtlety, with Verhaeren, with
Mallarm, with Maeterlinck, until at last, it may be, a new agreement
among refined and studious men gives birth to a new passion, and what
seems literature becomes religion; or downward, taking the soul with
us until all is simplified and solidified again. That is the choice of
choicesthe way of the bird until common eyes have lost us, or to the
market carts; but we must see to it that the soul goes with us, for the
birds song is beautiful, and the traditions of modern imagination,
growing always more musical, more lyrical, more melancholy, casting
up now a Shelley, now a Swinburne, now a Wagner, are, it may be, the
frenzy of those that are about to see what the magic hymn printed
by the Abb de Villars has called the Crown of Living and Melodious
Diamonds. If the carts have hit our fancy we must have the soul tight
within our bodies, for it has grown so fond of a beauty accumulated by
subtle generations that it will for a long time be impatient with our
thirst for mere force, mere personality, for the tumult of the blood.
If it begin to slip away we must go after it, for Shelleys Chapel of
the Morning Star is better than Burnss beer-housesurely it was beer,
not barleycornexcept at the days weary end; and it is always better
than that uncomfortable place where there is no beer, the machine shop
of the realists.




THE MUSICIAN AND THE ORATOR


WALTER PATER says music is the type of all the Arts, but somebody else,
I forget now who, that oratory is their type. You will side with the
one or the other according to the nature of your energy, and I in my
present mood am all for the man who, with an average audience before
him, uses all means of persuasionstories, laughter, tears, and but so
much music as he can discover on the wings of words. I would even avoid
the conversation of the lovers of music, who would draw us into the
impersonal land of sound and colour, and would have no one write with
a sonata in his memory. We may even speak a little evil of musicians,
having admitted that they will see before we do that melodious crown.
We may remind them that the housemaid does not respect the piano-tuner
as she does the plumber, and of the enmity that they have aroused among
all poets. Music is the most impersonal of things and words the most
personal, and that is why musicians do not like words. They masticate
them for a long time, being afraid they would not be able to digest
them, and when the words are so broken and softened and mixed with
spittle that they are not words any longer, they swallow them.




A GUITAR PLAYER


A GIRL has been playing on the guitar. She is pretty, and if I
didnt listen to her I could have watched her, and if I didnt watch
her I could have listened. Her voice, the movements of her body,
the expression of her face, all said the same thing. A player of a
different temper and body would have made all different, and might have
been delightful in some other way. A movement not of music only but of
life came to its perfection. I was delighted and I did not know why
until I thought, That is the way my people, the people I see in the
minds eye, play music, and I like it because it is all personal, as
personal as Villons poetry. The little instrument is quite light, and
the player can move freely and express a joy that is not of the fingers
and the mind only but of the whole being; and all the while her
movements call up into the mind, so erect and natural she is, whatever
is most beautiful in her daily life. Nearly all the old instruments
were like that, even the organ was once a little instrument, and when
it grew big our wise forefathers gave it to God in the cathedrals,
where it befits him to be everything. But if you sit at the piano, it
is the piano, the mechanism, that is the important thing, and nothing
of you means anything but your fingers and your intellect.




THE LOOKING-GLASS


I HAVE just been talking to a girl with a shrill monotonous voice and
an abrupt way of moving. She is fresh from school, where they have
taught her history and geography whereby a soul can be discerned,
but what is the value of an education, or even in the long run of a
science, that does not begin with the personality, the habitual self,
and illustrate all by that? Somebody should have taught her to speak
for the most part on whatever note of her voice is most musical, and
soften those harsh notes by speaking, not singing, to some stringed
instrument, taking note after note and, as it were, caressing her
words a little as if she loved the sound of them, and have taught her
after this some beautiful pantomimic dance, till it had grown a habit
to live for eye and ear. A wise theatre might make a training in strong
and beautiful life the fashion, teaching before all else the heroic
discipline of the looking-glass, for is not beauty, even as lasting
love, one of the most difficult of the arts?




THE TREE OF LIFE


WE artists have taken over-much to heart that old commandment about
seeking after the Kingdom of Heaven. Verlaine told me that he had tried
to translate In Memoriam, but could not because Tennyson was too
noble, too Anglais, and, when he should have been broken-hearted, had
many reminiscences. About that time I found in some English review an
essay of his on Shakespeare. I had once a fine Shakespeare, he wrote,
or some such words, but I have it no longer. I write from memory. One
wondered in what vicissitude he had sold it, and for what money; and an
image of the man rose in the imagination. To be his ordinary self as
much as possible, not a scholar or even a reader, that was certainly
his pose; and in the lecture he gave at Oxford he insisted that the
poet should hide nothing of himself, though he must speak it all with
a care of that dignity which should manifest itself, if not in the
perfection of form, at all events with an invisible, insensible, but
effectual endeavour after this lofty and severe quality, I was about
to say this virtue. It was this feeling for his own personality, his
delight in singing his own life, even more than that life itself, which
made the generation I belong to compare him to Villon. It was not till
after his death that I understood the meaning his words should have
had for me, for while he lived I was interested in nothing but states
of mind, lyrical moments, intellectual essences. I would not then have
been as delighted as I am now by that guitar player, or as shocked as
I am now by that girl whose movements have grown abrupt, and whose
voice has grown harsh by the neglect of all but external activities.
I had not learned what sweetness, what rhythmic movement, there is in
those who have become the joy that is themselves. Without knowing it,
I had come to care for nothing but impersonal beauty. I had set out
on life with the thought of putting my very self into poetry, and had
understood this as a representation of my own visions and an attempt
to cut away the non-essential, but as I imagined the visions outside
myself my imagination became full of decorative landscape and of still
life. I thought of myself as something unmoving and silent living in
the middle of my own mind and body, a grain of sand in Bloomsbury or
in Connacht that Satans watch fiends cannot find. Then one day I
understood quite suddenly, as the way is, that I was seeking something
unchanging and unmixed and always outside myself, a Stone or an Elixir
that was always out of reach, and that I myself was the fleeting thing
that held out its hand. The more I tried to make my art deliberately
beautiful, the more did I follow the opposite of myself, for deliberate
beauty is like a woman always desiring mans desire. Presently I found
that I entered into myself and pictured myself and not some essence
when I was not seeking beauty at all, but merely to lighten the mind
of some burden of love or bitterness thrown upon it by the events of
life. We are only permitted to desire life, and all the rest should be
our complaints or our praise of that exacting mistress who can awake
our lips into song with her kisses. But we must not give her all, we
must deceive her a little at times, for, as Le Sage says in _The
Devil on Two Sticks_, the false lovers who do not become melancholy or
jealous with honest passion have the happiest mistress and are rewarded
the soonest and by the most beautiful. Our deceit will give us style,
mastery, that dignity, that lofty and severe quality Verlaine spoke
of. To put it otherwise, we should ascend out of common interests, the
thoughts of the newspapers, of the market-place, of men of science, but
only so far as we can carry the normal, passionate, reasoning self, the
personality as a whole. We must find some place upon the Tree of Life
high enough for the forked branches to keep it safe, and low enough to
be out of the little wind-tossed boughs and twigs, for the Phnix nest,
for the passion that is exaltation and not negation of the will, for
the wings that are always upon fire.




THE PRAISE OF OLD WIVES TALES


AN art may become impersonal because it has too much circumstance
or too little, because the world is too little or too much with it,
because it is too near the ground or too far up among the branches. I
met an old man out fishing a year ago, who said to me, Don Quixote
and Odysseus are always near to me; that is true for me also, for even
Hamlet and Lear and dipus are more cloudy. No playwright ever has made
or ever will make a character that will follow us out of the theatre
as Don Quixote follows us out of the book, for no playwright can be
wholly episodical, and when one constructs, bringing ones characters
into complicated relations with one another, something impersonal comes
into the story. Society, fate, tendency, something not quite human,
begins to arrange the characters and to excite into action only so much
of their humanity as they find it necessary to show to one another. The
common heart will always love better the tales that have something of
an old wives tale and that look upon their hero from every side as if
he alone were wonderful, as a child does with a new penny. In plays of
a comedy too extravagant to photograph life, or written in verse, the
construction is of a necessity woven out of naked motives and passions,
but when an atmosphere of modern reality has to be built up as well,
and the tendency, or fate, or society has to be shown as it is about
ourselves, the characters grow fainter, and we have to read the book
many times or see the play many times before we can remember them.
Even then they are only possible in a certain drawing-room and among
such and such people, and we must carry all that lumber in our heads. I
thought Tolstois War and Peace the greatest story I had ever read,
and yet it has gone from me; even Lancelot, ever a shadow, is more
visible in my memory than all its substance.




THE PLAY OF MODERN MANNERS


OF all artistic forms that have had a large share of the worlds
attention, the worst is the play about modern educated people. Except
where it is superficial or deliberately argumentative it fills ones
soul with a sense of commonness as with dust. It has one mortal
ailment. It cannot become impassioned, that is to say vital, without
making somebody gushing and sentimental. Educated and well-bred people
do not wear their hearts upon their sleeves and they have no artistic
and charming language except light persiflage and no powerful language
at all, and when they are deeply moved they look silently into the
fireplace. Again and again I have watched some play of this sort with
growing curiosity through the opening scene. The minor people argue,
chaff one another, hint sometimes at some deeper stream of life just
as we do in our houses, and I am content. But all the time I have
been wondering why the chief character, the man who is to bear the
burden of fate, is gushing, sentimental and quite without ideas. Then
the great scene comes and I understand that he cannot be well-bred or
self-possessed or intellectual, for if he were he would draw a chair to
the fire and there would be no duologue at the end of the third act.
Ibsen understood the difficulty and made all his characters a little
provincial that they might not put each other out of countenance, and
made a leading article sort of poetry, phrases about vine leaves and
harps in the air it was possible to believe them using in their moments
of excitement, and if the play needed more than that, they could always
do something stupid. They could go out and hoist a flag as they do
at the end of _Little Eyolf_. One only understands that this manner,
deliberately adopted one doubts not, had gone into his soul and filled
it with dust, when one has noticed that he could no longer create a
man of genius. The happiest writers are those that, knowing this form
of play is slight and passing, keep to the surface, never showing
anything but the arguments and the persiflage of daily observation, or
now and then, instead of the expression of passion, a stage picture,
a man holding a womans hand or sitting with his head in his hands in
dim light by the red glow of a fire. It was certainly an understanding
of the slightness of the form, of its incapacity for the expression of
the deeper sorts of passion, that made the French invent the play with
a thesis, for where there is a thesis people can grow hot in argument,
almost the only kind of passion that displays itself in our daily
life. The novel of contemporary educated life is upon the other hand a
permanent form because having the power of psychological description it
can follow the thought of a man who is looking into the grate.




HAS THE DRAMA OF CONTEMPORARY LIFE A ROOT OF ITS OWN?


IN watching a play about modern educated people, with its meagre
language and its action crushed into the narrow limits of possibility,
I have found myself constantly saying: Maybe it has its power to move,
slight as that is, from being able to suggest fundamental contrasts
and passions which romantic and poetical literature have shown to be
beautiful. A man facing his enemies alone in a quarrel over the purity
of the water in a Norwegian Spa and using no language but that of the
newspapers can call up into our minds, let us say, the passion of
Coriolanus. The lovers and fighters of old imaginative literature are
more vivid experiences in the soul than anything but ones own ruling
passion that is itself riddled by their thought as by lightning, and
even two dumb figures on the roads can call up all that glory. Put the
man who has no knowledge of literature before a play of this kind and
he will say, as he has said in some form or other in every age at the
first shock of naturalism, What has brought me out to hear nothing but
the words we use at home when we are talking of the rates? And he will
prefer to it any play where there is visible beauty or mirth, where
life is exciting, at high tide as it were. It is not his fault that he
will prefer in all likelihood a worse play although its kind may be
greater, for we have been following the lure of science for generations
and forgotten him and his. I come always back to this thought. There
is something of an old wives tale in fine literature. The makers
of it are like an old peasant telling stories of the great famine or
the hangings of 98 or his own memories. He has felt something in the
depth of his mind and he wants to make it as visible and powerful
to our senses as possible. He will use the most extravagant words
or illustrations if they suit his purpose. Or he will invent a wild
parable, and the more his mind is on fire or the more creative it is,
the less will he look at the outer world or value it for its own sake.
It gives him metaphors and examples and that is all. He is even a
little scornful of it, for it seems to him while the fit is on that the
fire has gone out of it and left it but white ashes. I cannot explain
it, but I am certain that every high thing was invented in this way,
between sleeping and waking, as it were, and that peering and peeping
persons are but hawkers of stolen goods. How else could their noses
have grown so ravenous or their eyes so sharp?




WHY THE BLIND MAN IN ANCIENT TIMES WAS MADE A POET


A DESCRIPTION in the Iliad or the Odyssey, unlike one in the neid or
in most modern writers, is the swift and natural observation of a man
as he is shaped by life. It is a refinement of the primary hungers and
has the least possible of what is merely scholarly or exceptional. It
is, above all, never too observant, too professional, and when the
book is closed we have had our energies enriched, for we have been in
the mid-current. We have never seen anything Odysseus could not have
seen while his thought was of the Cyclops, or Achilles when Briseis
moved him to desire. In the heart of the greatest periods there is
something careless and sudden in all habitual moods though not in their
expression, because these moods are a conflagration of all the energies
of active life. In primitive times the blind man became a poet as he
becomes a fiddler in our villages, because he had to be driven out of
activities all his nature cried for before he could be contented with
the praise of life. And often it is Villon or Verlaine with impediments
plain to all, who sings of life with the ancient simplicity. Poets of
coming days, when once more it will be possible to write as in the
great epochs, will recognise that their sacrifice shall be to refuse
what blindness and evil name, or imprisonment at the outsetting,
denied to men who missed thereby the sting of a deliberate refusal.
The poets of the ages of silver need no refusal of life, the dome of
many-coloured glass is already shattered while they live. They look at
life deliberately and as if from beyond life, and the greatest of them
need suffer nothing but the sadness that the saints have known. This
is their aim, and their temptation is not a passionate activity, but
the approval of their fellows, which comes to them in full abundance
only when they delight in the general thoughts that hold together a
cultivated middle-class, where irresponsibilities of position and
poverty are lacking; the things that are more excellent among educated
men who have political pre-occupations, Augustus Csars affability,
all that impersonal fecundity which muddies the intellectual passions.
Ben Jonson says in the Poetaster, that even the best of men without
Promethean fire is but a hollow statue, and a studious man will
commonly forget after some forty winters that of a certainty Promethean
fire will burn somebodys fingers. It may happen that poets will be
made more often by their sins than by their virtues, for general praise
is unlucky, as the villages know, and not merely as I imaginefor I
am superstitious about these thingsbecause the praise of all but an
equal enslaves and adds a pound to the ball at the ankle with every
compliment.

All energy that comes from the whole man is as irregular as the
lightning, for the communicable and forecastable and discoverable is a
part only, a hungry chicken under the breast of the pelican, and the
test of poetry is not in reason but in a delight not different from
the delight that comes to a man at the first coming of love into the
heart. I knew an old man who had spent his whole life cutting hazel
and privet from the paths, and in some seventy years he had observed
little but had many imaginations. He had never seen like a naturalist,
never seen things as they are, for his habitual mood had been that of
a man stirred in his affairs; and Shakespeare, Tintoretto, though the
times were running out when Tintoretto painted, nearly all the great
men of the Renaissance, looked at the world with eyes like his. Their
minds were never quiescent, never as it were in a mood for scientific
observations, always an exaltation, neverto use known wordsfounded
upon an elimination of the personal factor; and their attention and
the attention of those they worked for dwelt constantly with what is
present to the mind in exaltation. I am too modern fully to enjoy
Tintorettos Creation of the Milky Way, I cannot fix my thoughts upon
that glowing and palpitating flesh intently enough to forget, as I
can the make-believe of a fairy tale, that heavy drapery hanging from
a cloud, though I find my pleasure in _King Lear_ heightened by the
make-believe that comes upon it all when the fool says: This prophecy
Merlin shall make, for I live before his time;and I always find it
quite natural, so little does logic in the mere circumstance matter in
the finest art, that Richards and Richmonds tents should be side by
side. I saw with delight _The Knight of the Burning Pestle_ when Mr.
Carr revived it, and found it none the worse because the apprentice
acted a whole play upon the spur of the moment and without committing a
line to heart. When Ben Jonsons _Epicne_ rammed a century of laughter
into the two hours traffic, I found with amazement that almost every
journalist had put logic on the seat, where our lady imagination should
pronounce that unjust and favouring sentence her womans heart is ever
plotting, and had felt bound to cherish none but reasonable sympathies
and to resent the baiting of that grotesque old man. I have been
looking over a book of engravings made in the eighteenth century from
those wall-pictures of Herculaneum and Pompeii that were, it seems, the
work of journeymen copying from finer paintings, for the composition
is always too good for the execution. I find in great numbers an
indifference to obvious logic, to all that the eye sees at common
moments. Perseus shows Andromeda the death she lived by in a pool, and
though the lovers are carefully drawn the reflection is upside down
that we may see it the better. There is hardly an old master who has
not made known to us in some like way how little he cares for what
every fool can see and every knave can praise. The men who imagined
the arts were not less superstitious in religion, understanding the
spiritual relations, but not the mechanical, and finding nothing that
need strain the throat in those gnats the floods of Noah and Deucalion,
and in Joshuas moon at Ascalon.




CONCERNING SAINTS AND ARTISTS


I TOOK the Indian hemp with certain followers of St. Martin on the
ground floor of a house in the Latin Quarter. I had never taken it
before, and was instructed by a boisterous young poet, whose English
was no better than my French. He gave me a little pellet, if I am not
forgetting, an hour before dinner, and another after we had dined
together at some restaurant. As we were going through the streets to
the meeting-place of the Martinists, I felt suddenly that a cloud I was
looking at floated in an immense space, and for an instant my being
rushed out, as it seemed, into that space with ecstasy. I was myself
again immediately, but the poet was wholly above himself, and presently
he pointed to one of the street lamps now brightening in the fading
twilight, and cried at the top of his voice, Why do you look at me
with your great eye? There were perhaps a dozen people already much
excited when we arrived; and after I had drunk some cups of coffee and
eaten a pellet or two more, I grew very anxious to dance, but did not,
as I could not remember any steps. I sat down and closed my eyes; but
no, I had no visions, nothing but a sensation of some dark shadow which
seemed to be telling me that some day I would go into a trance and so
out of my body for awhile, but not yet. I opened my eyes and looked at
some red ornament on the mantelpiece, and at once the room was full
of harmonies of red, but when a blue china figure caught my eye the
harmonies became blue upon the instant. I was puzzled, for the reds
were all there, nothing had changed, but they were no longer important
or harmonious; and why had the blues so unimportant but a moment ago
become exciting and delightful? Thereupon it struck me that I was
seeing like a painter, and that in the course of the evening everyone
there would change through every kind of artistic perception.

After a while a Martinist ran towards me with a piece of paper on which
he had drawn a circle with a dot in it, and pointing at it with his
finger he cried out, God, God! Some immeasurable mystery had been
revealed, and his eyes shone; and at some time or other a lean and
shabby man, with rather a distinguished face, showed me his horoscope
and pointed with an ecstasy of melancholy at its evil aspects. The
boisterous poet, who was an old eater of the Indian hemp, had told me
that it took one three months growing used to it, three months more
enjoying it, and three months being cured of it. These men were in
their second period; but I never forgot myself, never really rose above
myself for more than a moment, and was even able to feel the absurdity
of that gaiety, an Herr Nordau among the men of genius, but one that
was abashed at his own sobriety. The sky outside was beginning to grey
when there came a knocking at the window shutters. Somebody opened the
window, and a woman in evening dress, who was not a little bewildered
to find so many people, was helped down into the room. She had been at
a students ball unknown to her husband, who was asleep overhead, and
had thought to have crept home unobserved, but for a confederate at the
window. All those talking or dancing men laughed in a dreamy way; and
she, understanding that there was no judgment in the laughter of men
that had no thought but of the spectacle of the world, blushed, laughed
and darted through the room and so upstairs. Alas that the hangmans
rope should be own brother to that Indian happiness that keeps alone,
were it not for some stray cactus, mother of as many dreams, an
immemorial impartiality and simpleness.




THE SUBJECT MATTER OF DRAMA


I READ this sentence a few days ago, or one like it, in an obituary
of Ibsen: Let nobody again go back to the old ballad material of
Shakespeare, to murders, and ghosts, for what interests us on the
stage is modern experience and the discussion of our interests;
and in another part of the article Ibsen was blamed because he had
written of suicides and in other ways made use of the morbid terror
of death. Dramatic literature has for a long time been left to the
criticism of journalists, and all these, the old stupid ones and the
new clever ones, have tried to impress upon it their absorption in the
life of the moment, their delight in obvious originality and in obvious
logic, their shrinking from the ancient and insoluble. The writer I
have quoted is much more than a journalist, but he has lived their
hurried life, and instinctively turns to them for judgment. He is not
thinking of the great poets and painters, of the cloud of witnesses,
who are there that we may become, through our understanding of their
minds, spectators of the ages, but of this age. Drama is a means of
expression, not a special subject matter, and the dramatist is as free
to choose where he has a mind to as the poet of Endymion or as the
painter of Mary Magdalene at the door of Simon the Pharisee. So far
from the discussion of our interests and the immediate circumstance of
our life being the most moving to the imagination, it is what is old
and far off that stirs us the most deeply. There is a sentence in _The
Marriage of Heaven and Hell_ that is meaningless until we understand
Blakes system of correspondences. The best wine is the oldest, the
best water the newest.

Water is experience, immediate sensation, and wine is emotion, and
it is with the intellect, as distinguished from imagination, that we
enlarge the bounds of experience and separate it from all but itself,
from illusion, from memory, and create among other things science
and good journalism. Emotion, on the other hand, grows intoxicating
and delightful after it has been enriched with the memory of old
emotions, with all the uncounted flavours of old experience, and it is
necessarily an antiquity of thought, emotions that have been deepened
by the experiences of many men of genius, that distinguishes the
cultivated man. The subject-matter of his meditation and invention is
old, and he will disdain a too conscious originality in the arts as
in those matters of daily life where, is it not Balzac who says, we
are all conservatives? He is above all things well-bred, and whether
he write or paint will not desire a technique that denies or obtrudes
his long and noble descent. Corneille and Racine did not deny their
masters, and when Dante spoke of his master Virgil there was no crowing
of the cock. In their day imitation was conscious or all but conscious,
and while originality was but so much the more a part of the man
himself, so much the deeper because unconscious, no quick analysis
could find out their miracle, that needed, it may be, generations to
reveal; but it is our imitation that is unconscious and that waits the
certainties of time. The more religious the subject-matter of an art,
the more will it be as it were stationary, and the more ancient will
be the emotion that it arouses and the circumstances that it calls up
before our eyes. When in the Middle Ages the pilgrim to St. Patricks
Purgatory found himself on the lake side, he found a boat made out
of a hollow tree to ferry him to the cave of vision. In religious
painting and poetry, crowns and swords of an ancient pattern take upon
themselves new meanings, and it is impossible to separate our idea of
what is noble from a mystic stair, where not men and women, but robes,
jewels, incidents, ancient utilities float upward slowly over the all
but sleeping mind, putting on emotional and spiritual life as they
ascend until they are swallowed up by some far glory that they even
were too modern and momentary to endure. All art is dream, and what
the day is done with is dreaming ripe, and what art moulds religion
accepts, and in the end all is in the wine cup, all is in the drunken
phantasy, and the grapes begin to stammer.




THE TWO KINDS OF ASCETICISM


IT is not possible to separate an emotion or a spiritual state from
the image that calls it up and gives it expression. Michael Angelos
Moses, Velasquez Philip the Second, the colour purple, a crucifix,
call into life an emotion or state that vanishes with them because
they are its only possible expression, and that is why no mind is more
valuable than the images it contains. The imaginative writer differs
from the saint in that he identifies himselfto the neglect of his own
soul, alas!with the soul of the world, and frees himself from all that
is impermanent in that soul, an ascetic not of women and wine, but of
the newspapers. That which is permanent in the soul of the world upon
the other hand, the great passions that trouble all and have but a
brief recurring life of flower and seed in any man, is the renunciation
of the saint who seeks not an eternal art, but his own eternity. The
artist stands between the saint and the world of impermanent things,
and just in so far as his mind dwells on what is impermanent in his
sense, on all that modern experience and the discussion of our
interests, that is to say on what never recurs, as desire and hope,
terror and weariness, spring and autumn, recur in varying rhythms,
will his mind become critical, as distinguished from creative, and his
emotions wither. He will think less of what he sees and more of his own
attitude towards it, and will express this attitude by an essentially
critical selection and emphasis. I am not quite sure of my memory, but
I think that Mr. Ricketts has said in his book on the Prado that he
feels the critic in Velasquez for the first time in painting, and we
all feel the critic in Whistler and Degas, in Browning, even in Mr.
Swinburne, in the finest art of all ages but the greatest. The end for
art is the ecstasy awakened by the presence before an ever-changing
mind of what is permanent in the world, or by the arousing of that
mind itself into the very delicate and fastidious mood habitual with
it when it is seeking those permanent and recurring things. There is a
little of both ecstasies at all times, but at this time we have a small
measure of the creative impulse itself, of the divine vision, a great
one of the lost travellers dream under the hill, perhaps because all
the old simple things have been painted or written, and they will only
have meaning for us again when a new race or a new civilisation has
made us look upon all with new eyesight.




IN THE SERPENTS MOUTH


THERE is an old saying that God is a circle whose centre is everywhere.
If that is true, the saint goes to the centre, the poet and artist to
the ring where everything comes round again. The poet must not seek for
what is still and fixed, for that has no life for him; and if he did,
his style would become cold and monotonous, and his sense of beauty
faint and sickly, as are both style and beauty to my imagination in the
prose and poetry of Newman, but be content to find his pleasure in all
that is for ever passing away that it may come again, in the beauty of
woman, in the fragile flowers of spring, in momentary heroic passion,
in whatever is most fleeting, most impassioned, as it were, for its
own perfection, most eager to return in its glory. Yet perhaps he must
endure the impermanent a little, for these things return, but not
wholly, for no two faces are alike, and, it may be, had we more learned
eyes, no two flowers. Is it that all things are made by the struggle of
the individual and the world, of the unchanging and the returning, and
that the saint and the poet are over all, and that the poet has made
his home in the Serpents mouth?




THE BLACK AND THE WHITE ARROWS


INSTINCT creates the recurring and the beautiful, all the winding of
the serpent; but reason, the most ugly man, as Blake called it, is
a drawer of the straight line, the maker of the arbitrary and the
impermanent, for no recurring spring will ever bring again yesterdays
clock. Sanctity has its straight line also, darting from the centre,
and with these arrows the many-coloured serpent, theme of all our
poetry, is maimed and hunted. He that finds the white arrow shall have
wisdom older than the Serpent, but what of the black arrow? How much
knowledge, how heavy a quiver of the crow-feathered ebony rods can the
soul endure?




HIS MISTRESSS EYEBROWS


THE preoccupation of our Art and Literature with knowledge, with the
surface of life, with the arbitrary, with mechanism, has arisen out
of the root. A careful, but not necessarily very subtle man, could
foretell the history of any religion if he knew its first principle,
and that it would live long enough to fulfil itself. The mind can
never do the same thing twice over, and having exhausted simple
beauty and meaning, it passes to the strange and hidden, and at last
must find its delight, having outrun its harmonies in the emphatic
and discordant. When I was a boy at the art school I watched an
older student late returned from Paris, with a wonder that had no
understanding in it. He was very amorous, and every new love was the
occasion of a new picture, and every new picture was uglier than its
forerunner. He was excited about his mistresss eyebrows, as was
fitting, but the interest of beauty had been exhausted by the logical
energies of Art, which destroys where it has rummaged, and can but
discover, whether it will or no. We cannot discover our subject-matter
by deliberate intellect, for when a subject-matter ceases to move us we
must go elsewhere, and when it moves us, even though it be that old
ballad material of Shakespeare or even the morbid terror of death,
we can laugh at reason. We must not ask is the world interested in this
or that, for nothing is in question but our own interest, and we can
understand no other. Our place in the Hierarchy is settled for us by
our choice of a subject-matter, and all good criticism is hieratic,
delighting in setting things above one another, Epic and Drama above
Lyric and so on, and not merely side by side. But it is our instinct
and not our intellect that chooses. We can deliberately refashion our
characters, but not our painting or our poetry. If our characters also
were not unconsciously refashioned so completely by the unfolding of
the logical energies of Art, that even simple things have in the end a
new aspect in our eyes, the Arts would not be among those things that
return for ever. The ballads that Bishop Percy gathered returned in the
_Ancient Mariner_ and the delight in the world of old Greek sculptors
sprang into a more delicate loveliness in that archaistic head of
the young athlete down the long corridor to your left hand as you go
into the British Museum. Civilisation too, will not that also destroy
where it has loved, until it shall bring the simple and natural things
again and a new Argo with all the gilding on her bows sail out to find
another fleece?




THE TRESSES OF THE HAIR


HAFIZ cried to his beloved, I made a bargain with that brown hair
before the beginning of time, and it shall not be broken through
unending time, and it may be that Mistress Nature knows that we have
lived many times, and that whatsoever changes and winds into itself
belongs to us. She covers her eyes away from us, but she lets us play
with the tresses of her hair.




A TOWER ON THE APENNINE


THE other day I was walking towards Urbino, where I was to spend
the night, having crossed the Apennines from San Sepolcro, and had
come to a level place on the mountain-top near the journeys end. My
friends were in a carriage somewhere behind, on a road which was still
ascending in great loops, and I was alone amid a visionary fantastic
impossible scenery. It was sunset and the stormy clouds hung upon
mountain after mountain, and far off on one great summit a cloud
darker than the rest glimmered with lightning. Away south upon another
mountain a medival tower, with no building near nor any sign of life,
rose into the clouds. I saw suddenly in the minds eye an old man,
erect and a little gaunt, standing in the door of the tower, while
about him broke a windy light. He was the poet who had at last, because
he had done so much for the worlds sake, come to share in the dignity
of the saint. He had hidden nothing of himself, but he had taken care
of that dignity ... the perfection of form ... this lofty and severe
quality ... this virtue. And though he had but sought it for the
worlds sake, or for a womans praise, it had come at last into his
body and his mind. Certainly as he stood there he knew how from behind
that laborious mood, that pose, that genius, no flower of himself but
all himself, looked out as from behind a mask that other Who alone
of all men, the country people say, is not a hairs breadth more nor
less than six feet high. He has in his ears well instructed voices and
seeming solid sights are before his eyes, and not as we say of many a
one, speaking in metaphor, but as this were Delphi or Eleusis, and the
substance and the voice come to him among his memories which are of
womens faces; for was it Columbanus or another that wrote There is
one among the birds that is perfect, and one perfect among the fish?




THE THINKING OF THE BODY


THOSE learned men who are a terror to children and an ignominious
sight in lovers eyes, all those butts of a traditional humour where
there is something of the wisdom of peasants, are mathematicians,
theologians, lawyers, men of science of various kinds. They have
followed some abstract reverie, which stirs the brain only and needs
that only, and have therefore stood before the looking-glass without
pleasure and never known those thoughts that shape the lines of the
body for beauty or animation, and wake a desire for praise or for
display.

There are two pictures of Venice side by side in the house where I am
writing this, a Canaletto that has little but careful drawing, and a
not very emotional pleasure in clean bright air, and a Franz Francken,
where the blue water, that in the other stirs one so little, can make
one long to plunge into the green depth where a cloud shadow falls.
Neither painting could move us at all, if our thought did not rush out
to the edges of our flesh, and it is so with all good art, whether the
Victory of Samothrace which reminds the soles of our feet of swiftness,
or the Odyssey that would send us out under the salt wind, or the young
horsemen on the Parthenon, that seem happier than our boyhood ever
was, and in our boyhoods way. Art bids us touch and taste and hear
and see the world, and shrinks from what Blake calls mathematic form,
from every abstract thing, from all that is of the brain only, from
all that is not a fountain jetting from the entire hopes, memories,
and sensations of the body. Its morality is personal, knows little of
any general law, has no blame for Little Musgrave, no care for Lord
Barnards house, seems lighter than a breath and yet is hard and heavy,
for if a man is not ready to face toil and risk, and in all gaiety
of heart, his body will grow unshapely and his heart lack the wild
will that stirs desire. It approved before all men those that talked
or wrestled or tilted under the walls of Urbino, or sat in the wide
window-seats discussing all things, with love ever in their thought,
when the wise Duchess ordered all, and the Lady Emilia gave the theme.




RELIGIOUS BELIEF NECESSARY TO SYMBOLIC ART


ALL art is sensuous, but when a man puts only his contemplative nature,
and his more vague desires into his art, the sensuous images through
which it speaks become broken, fleeting, uncertain, or are chosen for
their distance from general experience, and all grows unsubstantial
and fantastic. When imagination moves in a dim world like the country
of sleep in Loves Nocturne and Siren there winds her dizzy hair and
sings we go to it for delight indeed but in our weariness. If we are
to sojourn there that world must grow consistent with itself, emotion
must be related to emotion by a system of ordered images, as in the
_Divine Comedy_. It must grow to be symbolic, that is, for the soul
can only achieve a distinct separated life where many related objects
at once distinguish and arouse its energies in their fulness. All
visionaries have entered into such a world in trances, and all ideal
art has trance for warranty. Shelley seemed to Matthew Arnold to beat
his ineffectual wings in the void, and I only made my pleasure in him
contented pleasure by massing in my imagination his recurring images of
towers and rivers, and caves with fountains in them, and that one star
of his, till his world had grown solid underfoot and consistent enough
for the souls habitation.

But even then I lacked something to compensate my imagination for
geographical and historical reality, for the testimony of our ordinary
senses, and found myself wishing for and trying to imagine, as I had
also when reading Keats _Endymion_, a crowd of believers who could
put into all those strange sights the strength of their belief and the
rare testimony of their visions. A little crowd had been sufficient,
and I would have had Shelley a sectary that his revelation might have
found the only sufficient evidence of religion, miracle. All symbolic
art should arise out of a real belief, and that it cannot do so in
this age proves that this age is a road and not a resting-place for
the imaginative arts. I can only understand others by myself, and I am
certain that there are many who are not moved as they desire to be by
that solitary light burning in the tower of Prince Athanais, because it
has not entered into mens prayers nor lighted any through the sacred
dark of religious contemplation.

Lyrical poems even when they but speak of emotions common to all need,
if not a religious belief like the spiritual arts, a life that has
leisure for itself, and a society that is quickly stirred that our
emotion may be strengthened by the emotion of others. All circumstance
that makes emotion at once dignified and visible, increases the poets
power, and I think that is why I have always longed for some stringed
instrument and a listening audience not drawn out of the hurried
streets but from a life where it would be natural to murmur over again
the singers thought. When I heard Yvette Guilbert the other day, who
has the lyre or as good, I was not content, for she sang among people
whose life had nothing it could share with an exquisite art that should
rise out of life as the blade out of the spearshaft, a song out of the
mood, the fountain from its pool, all art out of the body, laughter
from a happy company. I longed to make all things over again, that she
might sing in some great hall, where there was no one that did not love
life and speak of it continually.




THE HOLY PLACES


WHEN all art was struck out of personality, whether as in our daily
business or in the adventure of religion, there was little separation
between holy and common things, and just as the arts themselves passed
quickly from passion to divine contemplation, from the conversation
of peasants to that of princes, the one song remembering the drunken
miller and but half forgetting Cambynskan bold; so did a man feel
himself near sacred presences when he turned his plough from the slope
of Cruachmaa or of Olympus. The occupations and the places known to
Homer or to Hesiod, those pure first artists, might, as it were, if
but the fashioners hands had loosened, have changed before the poems
end to symbols and vanished, winged and unweary, into the unchanging
worlds where religion only can discover life as well as peace. A
man of that unbroken day could have all the subtlety of Shelley,
and yet use no image unknown among the common people, and speak no
thought that was not a deduction from the common thought. Unless the
discovery of legendary knowledge and the returning belief in miracle,
or what we must needs call so, can bring once more a new belief in
the sanctity of common ploughland, and new wonders that reward no
difficult ecclesiastical routine but the common, wayward, spirited man,
we may never see again a Shelley and a Dickens in the one body, but
be broken to the end. We have grown jealous of the body, and we dress
it in dull unshapely clothes, that we may cherish aspiration alone.
Molire being but the master of common sense lived ever in the common
daylight, but Shakespeare could not, and Shakespeare seems to bring us
to the very market-place, when we remember Shelleys dizzy and Landors
calm disdain of usual daily things. And at last we have Villiers de
LIsle Adam crying in the ecstasy of a supreme culture, of a supreme
refusal, as for living, our servants will do that for us. One of
the means of loftiness, of marmorean stillness has been the choice of
strange and far away places, for the scenery of art, but this choice
has grown bitter to me, and there are moments when I cannot believe in
the reality of imaginations that are not inset with the minute life
of long familiar things and symbols and places. I have come to think
of even Shakespeares journeys to Rome or to Verona as the outflowing
of an unrest, a dissatisfaction with natural interests, an unstable
equilibrium of the whole European mind that would not have come had
Constantinople wall been built of better stone. I am orthodox and pray
for a resurrection of the body, and am certain that a man should find
his Holy Land where he first crept upon the floor, and that familiar
woods and rivers should fade into symbol with so gradual a change that
he never discover, no, not even in ecstasy itself, that he is beyond
space, and that time alone keeps him from Primum Mobile, the Supernal
Eden, and the White Rose over all.




EDMUND SPENSER


    _Included by kind permission of Messrs. T. C. and E. C. Jack._


I

WE know little of Spensers childhood and nothing of his parents,
except that his father was probably an Edmund Spenser of north-east
Lancashire, a man of good blood and belonging to a house of ancient
fame. He was born in London in 1552, nineteen years after the death
of Ariosto, and when Tasso was about eight years old. Full of the
spirit of the Renaissance, at once passionate and artificial, looking
out upon the world now as craftsman, now as connoisseur, he was to
found his art upon theirs rather than upon the more humane, the more
noble, the less intellectual art of Malory and the Minstrels. Deafened
and blinded by their influence, as so many of us were in boyhood by
that art of Hugo, that made the old simple writers seem but as brown
bread and water, he was always to love the journey more than its end,
the landscape more than the man, and reason more than life, and the
tale less than its telling. He entered Pembroke College, Cambridge,
in 1569, and translated allegorical poems out of Petrarch and Du
Bellay. To-day a young man translates out of Verlaine and Verhaeren;
but at that day Ronsard and Du Bellay were the living poets, who
promised revolutionary and unheard-of things to a poetry moving towards
elaboration and intellect, as oursthe serpents tooth in his own tail
againmoves towards simplicity and instinct. At Cambridge he met with
Hobbinol of _The Shepheards Calender_, a certain Gabriel Harvey, son of
a rope-maker at Saffron Walden, but now a Fellow of Pembroke College,
a notable man, some five or six years his elder. It is usual to think
ill of Harvey, because of his dislike of rhyme and his advocacy of
classical metres, and because he complained that Spenser preferred
his _Faerie Queene_ to the _Nine Muses_, and encouraged Hobgoblin to
run off with the Garland of Apollo. But at that crossroad, where so
many crowds mingled talking of so many lands, no one could foretell
in what bed he would sleep after nightfall. Milton was in the end to
dislike rhyme as much, and it is certain that rhyme is one of the
secondary causes of that disintegration of the personal instincts
which has given to modern poetry its deep colour for colours sake, its
overflowing pattern, its background of decorative landscape, and its
insubordination of detail. At the opening of a movement we are busy
with first principles, and can find out everything but the road we
are to go, everything but the weight and measure of the impulse, that
has come to us out of life itself, for that is always in defiance of
reason, always without a justification but by faith and works. Harvey
set Spenser to the making of verses in classical metre, and certain
lines have come down to us written in what Spenser called Iambicum
trimetrum. His biographers agree that they are very bad, but, though
I cannot scan them, I find in them the charm of what seems a sincere
personal emotion. The man himself, liberated from the minute felicities
of phrase and sound, that are the temptation and the delight of rhyme,
speaks of his Mistress some thought that came to him not for the sake
of poetry, but for loves sake, and the emotion instead of dissolving
into detached colours, into the spangly gloom that Keats saw froth
and boil when he put his eyes into the pillowy cleft, speaks to her
in poignant words as if out of a tear-stained love-letter:

    Unhappie verse, the witnesse of my unhappie state,
    Make thy selfe fluttring winge for thy fast flying
    Thought, and fly forth to my love wheresoever she be.
    Whether lying restlesse in heavy bedde, or else
    Sitting so cheerlesse at the cheerful boorde, or else
    Playing alone carelesse on her heavenlie virginals.
    If in bed, tell hir that my eyes can take no rest;
    If at boorde tell her that my mouth can eat no meate;
    If at her virginals, tell her that I can heare no mirth.


II

He left College in his twenty-fourth year, and stayed for a while in
Lancashire, where he had relations, and there fell in love with one he
has written of in _The Shepheards Calender_ as Rosalind, the widdowes
daughter of the Glenn, though she was, for all her shepherding, as
one learns from a College friend, a gentlewoman of no mean house.
She married Menalchus of the _Calender_ and Spenser lamented her
for years, in verses so full of disguise that one cannot say if his
lamentations come out of a broken heart or are but a useful movement
in the elaborate ritual of his poetry, a well-ordered incident in
the mythology of his imagination. To no English poet, perhaps to no
European poet before his day, had the natural expression of personal
feeling been so impossible, the clear vision of the lineaments of
human character so difficult; no others head and eyes had sunk so far
into the pillowy cleft. After a year of this life he went to London,
and by Harveys advice and introduction entered the service of the
Earl of Leicester, staying for a while in his house on the banks of
the Thames; and it was there in all likelihood that he met with the
Earls nephew, Sir Philip Sidney, still little more than a boy, but
with his head full of affairs of state. One can imagine that it was the
great Earl or Sir Philip Sidney that gave his imagination its moral
and practical turn, and one imagines him seeking from philosophical
men, who distrust instinct because it disturbs contemplation, and from
practical men who distrust everything they cannot use in the routine
of immediate events, that impulse and method of creation that can only
be learned with surety from the technical criticism of poets, and from
the excitement of some movement in the artistic life. Marlowe and
Shakespeare were still at school, and Ben Jonson was but five years
old. Sidney was doubtless the greatest personal influence that came
into Spensers life, and it was one that exalted moral zeal above every
other faculty. The great Earl impressed his imagination very deeply
also, for the lamentation over the Earl of Leicesters death is more
than a conventional Ode to a dead patron. Spensers verses about men,
nearly always indeed, seem to express more of personal joy and sorrow
than those about women, perhaps because he was less deliberately a poet
when he spoke of men. At the end of a long beautiful passage he laments
that unworthy men should be in the dead Earls place, and compares them
to the foxan unclean feederhiding in the lair the badger swept.
The imaginer of the festivals of Kenilworth was indeed the fit patron
for him, and alike, because of the strength and weakness of Spensers
art, one regrets that he could not have lived always in that elaborate
life a master of ceremony to the world, instead of being plunged into a
life that but stirred him to bitterness, as the way is with theoretical
minds in the tumults of events they cannot understand. In the winter
of 1579-80 he published _The Shepheards Calender_, a book of twelve
eclogues, one for every month of the year, and dedicated it to Sir
Philip Sidney. It was full of pastoral beauty and allegorical images of
current events, revealing too that conflict between the sthetic and
moral interests that was to run through well-nigh all his works, and
it became immediately famous. He was rewarded with a place as private
secretary to the Lord Lieutenant, Lord Grey de Wilton, and sent to
Ireland, where he spent nearly all the rest of his life. After a few
years there he bought Kilcolman Castle, which had belonged to the rebel
Earl of Desmond, and the rivers and hills about this castle came much
into his poetry. Our Irish Aubeg is Mulla mine, whose waves I taught
to weep, and the Ballyvaughan Hills, it has its rise among, old
Father Mole. He never pictured the true countenance of Irish scenery,
for his mind turned constantly to the courts of Elizabeth and to the
umbrageous level lands, where his own race was already seeding like a
great poppy:

    Both heaven and heavenly graces do much more
    (Quoth he), abound in that same land then this:
    For there all happie peace and plenteous store
    Conspire in one to make contented blisse.
    No wayling there nor wretchednesse is heard,
    No bloodie issues nor no leprosies,
    No griesly famine, nor no raging sweard,
    No nightly bordrags, nor no hue and cries;
    The shepheards there abroad may safely lie
    On hills and downes, withouten dread or daunger,
    No ravenous wolves the good mans hope destroy,
    Nor outlawes fell affray the forest raunger,
    The learned arts do florish in great honor,
    And Poets wits are had in peerlesse price.

Nor did he ever understand the people he lived among or the historical
events that were changing all things about him. Lord Grey de Wilton
had been recalled almost immediately, but it was his policy, brought
over ready-made in his ship, that Spenser advocated throughout all his
life, equally in his long prose book _The State of Ireland_ as in the
_Faerie Queene_, where Lord Grey was Artigall and the Iron man the
soldiers and executioners by whose hands he worked. Like an hysterical
patient he drew a complicated web of inhuman logic out of the bowels
of an insufficient premisethere was no right, no law, but that of
Elizabeth, and all that opposed her opposed themselves to God, to
civilisation, and to all inherited wisdom and courtesy, and should be
put to death. He made two visits to England, celebrating one of them
in _Colin Clouts come Home againe_, to publish the first three books
and the second three books of the _Faerie Queene_ respectively, and to
try for some English office or pension. By the help of Raleigh, now
his neighbour at Kilcolman, he had been promised a pension, but was
kept out of it by Lord Burleigh, who said, All that for a song! From
that day Lord Burleigh became that rugged forehead of the poems,
whose censure of this or that is complained of. During the last three
or four years of his life in Ireland he married a fair woman of his
neighbourhood, and about her wrote many intolerable artificial sonnets
and that most beautiful passage in the sixth book of the _Faerie
Queene_, which tells of Colin Clout piping to the Graces and to her;
and he celebrated his marriage in the most beautiful of all his poems,
the _Epithalamium_. His genius was pictorial, and these pictures of
happiness were more natural to it than any personal pride, or joy, or
sorrow. His new happiness was very brief, and just as he was rising to
something of Miltons grandeur in the fragment that has been called
_Mutabilitie_, the wandering companies that keep the woods, as he
called the Irish armies, drove him to his death. Ireland, where he
saw nothing but work for the Iron man, was in the midst of the last
struggle of the old Celtic order with England, itself about to turn
bottom upward, of the passion of the Middle Ages with the craft of the
Renaissance. Seven years after Spensers arrival in Ireland a large
merchant ship had carried off from Loch Swilly, by a very crafty device
common in those days, certain persons of importance. Red Hugh, a boy
of fifteen, and the coming head of Tirconnell, and various heads of
clans had been enticed on board the merchant ship to drink of a fine
vintage, and there made prisoners. All but Red Hugh were released, on
finding substitutes among the boys of their kindred, and the captives
were hurried to Dublin and imprisoned in the Burningham Tower. After
four years of captivity and one attempt that failed, Red Hugh and his
companions escaped into the Dublin mountains, one dying there of cold
and privation, and from that to their own country-side. Red Hugh allied
himself to Hugh ONeil, the most powerful of the Irish leadersOh,
deep, dissembling heart, born to great weal or woe of thy country!
an English historian had cried to himan Oxford man too, a man of the
Renaissance, and for a few years defeated English armies and shook the
power of England. The Irish, stirred by these events, and with it maybe
some rumours of _The State of Ireland_ sticking in their stomachs,
drove Spenser out of doors and burnt his house, one of his children, as
tradition has it, dying in the fire. He fled to England, and died some
three months later in January, 1599, as Ben Jonson says, of lack of
bread.

During the last four or five years of his life he had seen, without
knowing that he saw it, the beginning of the great Elizabethan
poetical movement. In 1598 he had pictured the Nine Muses lamenting
each one over the evil state in England, of the things that she had
in charge, but, like William Blakes more beautiful _Whether on Idas
shady brow_, their lamentations should have been a cradle-song. When
he died _Romeo and Juliet_, _Richard III._, and _Richard II._, and the
plays of Marlowe had all been acted, and in stately houses were sung
madrigals and love songs whose like has not been in the world since.
Italian influence had strengthened the old French joy that had never
died out among the upper classes, and an art was being created for
the last time in England which had half its beauty from continually
suggesting a life hardly less beautiful than itself.


III

When Spenser was buried at Westminster Abbey many poets read verses in
his praise, and threw then their verses and the pens that had written
them into his tomb. Like him they belonged, for all the moral zeal
that was gathering like a London fog, to that indolent, demonstrative
Merry England that was about to pass away. Men still wept when they
were moved, still dressed themselves in joyous colours, and spoke
with many gestures. Thoughts and qualities sometimes come to their
perfect expression when they are about to pass away, and Merry England
was dying in plays, and in poems, and in strange adventurous men. If
one of those poets who threw his copy of verses into the earth that
was about to close over his master were to come alive again, he would
find some shadow of the life he knew, though not the art he knew,
among young men in Paris, and would think that his true country. If
he came to England he would find nothing there but the triumph of the
Puritan and the merchantthose enemies he had feared and hatedand
he would weep perhaps, in that womanish way of his, to think that so
much greatness had been, not as he had hoped, the dawn, but the sunset
of a people. He had lived in the last days of what we may call the
Anglo-French nation, the old feudal nation that had been established
when the Norman and the Angevin made French the language of court
and market. In the time of Chaucer English poets still wrote much in
French, and even English labourers lilted French songs over their work;
and I cannot read any Elizabethan poem or romance without feeling the
pressure of habits of emotion, and of an order of life which were
conscious, for all their Latin gaiety, of a quarrel to the death with
that new Anglo-Saxon nation that was arising amid Puritan sermons and
Mar-Prelate pamphlets. This nation had driven out the language of
its conquerors, and now it was to overthrow their beautiful, haughty
imagination and their manners, full of abandon and wilfulness, and to
set in their stead earnestness and logic and the timidity and reserve
of a counting-house. It had been coming for a long while, for it had
made the Lollards; and when Anglo-French Chaucer was at Westminster its
poet, Langland, sang the office at St. Pauls. Shakespeare, with his
delight in great persons, with his indifference to the State, with his
scorn of the crowd, with his feudal passion, was of the old nation, and
Spenser, though a joyless earnestness had cast shadows upon him, and
darkened his intellect wholly at times, was of the old nation too. His
_Faerie Queene_ was written in Merry England, but when Bunyan wrote
in prison the other great English allegory Modern England had been
born. Bunyans men would do right that they might come some day to
the Delectable Mountain, and not at all that they might live happily
in a world whose beauty was but an entanglement about their feet.
Religion had denied the sacredness of an earth that commerce was about
to corrupt and ravish, but when Spenser lived the earth had still its
sheltering sacredness. His religion, where the paganism that is natural
to proud and happy people had been strengthened by the platonism of
the Renaissance, cherished the beauty of the soul and the beauty of
the body with, as it seemed, an equal affection. He would have had men
live well, not merely that they might win eternal happiness but that
they might live splendidly among men and be celebrated in many songs.
How could one live well if one had not the joy of the Creator and of
the Giver of gifts? He says in his _Hymn to Beauty_ that a beautiful
soul, unless for some stubbornness in the ground, makes for itself a
beautiful body, and he even denies that beautiful persons ever lived
who had not souls as beautiful. They may have been tempted until they
seemed evil, but that was the fault of others. And in his _Hymn to
Heavenly Beauty_ he sets a woman little known to theology, one that
he names Wisdom or Beauty, above Seraphim and Cherubim and in the
very bosom of God, and in the _Faerie Queene_ it is pagan Venus and
her lover Adonis who create the forms of all living things and send
them out into the world, calling them back again to the gardens of
Adonis at their lives end to rest there, as it seems, two thousand
years between life and life. He began in English poetry, despite a
temperament that delighted in sensuous beauty alone with perfect
delight, that worship of Intellectual Beauty which Shelley carried to a
much greater subtlety and applied to the whole of life.

The qualities, to each of whom he had planned to give a Knight, he
had borrowed from Aristotle and partly Christianised, but not to the
forgetting of their heathen birth. The chief of the Knights, who
would have combined in himself the qualities of all the others, had
Spenser lived to finish the _Faerie Queene_, was King Arthur, the
representative of an ancient quality, Magnificence. Born at the moment
of change, Spenser had indeed many Puritan thoughts. It has been
recorded that he cut his hair short and half regretted his hymns to
Love and Beauty. But he has himself told us that the many-headed beast
overthrown and bound by Calidor, Knight of Courtesy, was Puritanism
itself. Puritanism, its zeal and its narrowness, and the angry
suspicion that it had in common with all movements of the ill-educated,
seemed no other to him than a slanderer of all fine things. One
doubts, indeed, if he could have persuaded himself that there could
be any virtue at all without courtesy, perhaps without something of
pageant and eloquence. He was, I think, by nature altogether a man
of that old Catholic feudal nation, but, like Sidney, he wanted to
justify himself to his new masters. He wrote of knights and ladies,
wild creatures imagined by the aristocratic poets of the twelfth
century, and perhaps chiefly by English poets who had still the French
tongue; but he fastened them with allegorical nails to a big barn
door of common-sense, of merely practical virtue. Allegory itself had
risen into general importance with the rise of the merchant class in
the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries; and it was natural when that
class was about for the first time to shape an age in its image, that
the last epic poet of the old order should mix its art with his own
long-descended, irresponsible, happy art.


IV

Allegory and, to a much greater degree, symbolism are a natural
language by which the soul when entranced, or even in ordinary sleep,
communes with God and with angels. They can speak of things which
cannot be spoken of in any other language, but one will always, I
think, feel some sense of unreality when they are used to describe
things which can be described as well in ordinary words. Dante used
allegory to describe visionary things, and the first maker of _The
Romance of the Rose_, for all his lighter spirits, pretends that his
adventures came to him in a vision one May morning; while Bunyan, by
his preoccupation with heaven and the soul, gives his simple story
a visionary strangeness and intensity: he believes so little in the
world, that he takes us away from all ordinary standards of probability
and makes us believe even in allegory for a while. Spenser, on the
other hand, to whom allegory was not, as I think, natural at all,
makes us feel again and again that it disappoints and interrupts our
preoccupation with the beautiful and sensuous life he has called up
before our eyes. It interrupts us most when he copies Langland, and
writes in what he believes to be a mood of edification, and the least
when he is not quite serious, when he sets before us some procession
like a court pageant made to celebrate a wedding or a crowning. One
cannot think that he should have occupied himself with moral and
religious questions at all. He should have been content to be, as
Emerson thought Shakespeare was, a Master of the Revels to mankind. I
am certain that he never gets that visionary air which can alone make
allegory real, except when he writes out of a feeling for glory and
passion. He had no deep moral or religious life. He has never a line
like Dantes Thy Will is our Peace, or like Thomas  Kempiss The
Holy Spirit has liberated me from a multitude of opinions, or even
like Hamlets objection to the bare bodkin. He had been made a poet
by what he had almost learnt to call his sins. If he had not felt it
necessary to justify his art to some serious friend, or perhaps even to
that rugged forehead, he would have written all his life long, one
thinks, of the loves of shepherdesses and shepherds, among whom there
would have been perhaps the morals of the dovecot. One is persuaded
that his morality is official and impersonala system of life which
it was his duty to supportand it is perhaps a half understanding
of this that has made so many generations believe that he was the
first poet laureate, the first salaried moralist among the poets. His
processions of deadly sins, and his houses, where the very cornices
are arbitrary images of virtue, are an unconscious hypocrisy, an
undelighted obedience to the rugged forehead, for all the while he
is thinking of nothing but lovers whose bodies are quivering with the
memory or the hope of long embraces. When they are not together, he
will indeed embroider emblems and images much as those great ladies of
the courts of love embroidered them in their castles; and when these
are imagined out of a thirst for magnificence and not thought out in
a mood of edification, they are beautiful enough; but they are always
tapestries for corridors that lead to lovers meetings or for the walls
of marriage chambers. He was not passionate, for the passionate feed
their flame in wanderings and absences, when the whole being of the
beloved, every little charm of body and of soul, is always present to
the mind, filling it with heroical subtleties of desire. He is a poet
of the delighted senses, and his song becomes most beautiful when he
writes of those islands of Phdria and Acrasia, which angered that
rugged forehead, as it seems, but gave to Keats his _Belle Dame sans
Merci_ and his perilous seas in faery lands forlorn, and to William
Morris his _Water of the Wondrous Isles_.


V

The dramatists lived in a disorderly world, reproached by many,
persecuted even, but following their imagination wherever it led them.
Their imagination, driven hither and thither by beauty and sympathy,
put on something of the nature of eternity. Their subject was always
the soul, the whimsical, self-awakening, self-exciting, self-appeasing
soul. They celebrated its heroical, passionate will going by its own
path to immortal and invisible things. Spenser, on the other hand,
except among those smooth pastoral scenes and lovely effeminate islands
that have made him a great poet, tried to be of his time, or rather
of the time that was all but at hand. Like Sidney, whose charm it may
be led many into slavery, he persuaded himself that we enjoy Virgil
because of the virtues of neas, and so planned out his immense poem
that it would set before the imagination of citizens, in whom there
would soon be no great energy, innumerable blameless neases. He had
learned to put the State, which desires all the abundance for itself,
in the place of the Church, and he found it possible to be moved by
expedient emotions, merely because they were expedient, and to think
serviceable thoughts with no self-contempt. He loved his Queen a little
because she was the protectress of poets and an image of that old
Anglo-French nation that lay a-dying, but a great deal because she was
the image of the State which had taken possession of his conscience.
She was over sixty years old, and ugly and, it is thought, selfish, but
in his poetry she is fair Cynthia, a crown of lilies, the image
of the heavens, without mortal blemish, and has an angelic face,
where the red rose has meddled with the white; Phbus thrusts out
his golden head but to look upon her, and blushes to find himself
outshone. She is a fourth Grace, a queen of love, a sacred saint,
and above all her sex that ever yet has been. In the midst of his
praise of his own sweetheart he stops to remember that Elizabeth is
more beautiful, and an old man in _Daphnaida_, although he has been
brought to deaths door by the death of a beautiful daughter, remembers
that though his daughter seemed of angelic race, she was yet but the
primrose to the rose beside Elizabeth. Spenser had learned to look to
the State not only as the rewarder of virtue but as the maker of right
and wrong, and had begun to love and hate as it bid him. The thoughts
that we find for ourselves are timid and a little secret, but those
modern thoughts that we share with large numbers are confident and very
insolent. We have little else to-day, and when we read our newspaper
and take up its cry, above all its cry of hatred, we will not think
very carefully, for we hear the marching feet. When Spenser wrote of
Ireland he wrote as an official, and out of thoughts and emotions that
had been organised by the State. He was the first of many Englishmen to
see nothing but what he was desired to see. Could he have gone there
as a poet merely, he might have found among its poets more wonderful
imaginations than even those islands of Phdria and Acrasia. He would
have found among wandering storytellers, not indeed his own power of
rich, sustained description, for that belongs to lettered ease, but
certainly all the kingdom of Faerie, still unfaded, of which his own
poetry was often but a troubled image. He would have found men doing by
swift strokes of the imagination much that he was doing with painful
intellect, with that imaginative reason that soon was to drive out
imagination altogether and for a long time. He would have met with, at
his own door, storytellers among whom the perfection of Greek art was
indeed as unknown as his own power of detailed description, but who,
none the less, imagined or remembered beautiful incidents and strange,
pathetic out-crying that made them of Homers lineage. Flaubert says
somewhere, There are things in Hugo, as in Rabelais, that I could
have mended, things badly built, but then what thrusts of power beyond
the reach of conscious art! Is not all history but the coming of that
conscious art which first makes articulate and then destroys the old
wild energy? Spenser, the first poet struck with remorse, the first
poet who gave his heart to the State, saw nothing but disorder, where
the mouths that have spoken all the fables of the poets had not yet
become silent. All about him were shepherds and shepherdesses still
living the life that made Theocritus and Virgil think of shepherd and
poet as the one thing; but though he dreamed of Virgils shepherds
he wrote a book to advise, among many like things, the harrying of
all that followed flocks upon the hills, and of all the wandering
companies that keep the woods. His _View of the State of Ireland_
commends indeed the beauty of the hills and woods where they did
their shepherding, in that powerful and subtle language of his which
I sometimes think more full of youthful energy than even the language
of the great playwrights. He is sure it is yet a most beautiful and
sweet country as any under heaven, and that all would prosper but for
those agitators, those wandering companies that keep the wood, and
he would rid it of them by a certain expeditious way. There should be
four great garrisons. And those fowre garrisons issuing foorthe, at
such convenient times as they shall have intelligence or espiall upon
the enemye, will so drive him from one side to another and tennis him
amongst them, that he shall finde nowhere safe to keepe his creete,
or hide himselfe, but flying from the fire shall fall into the water,
and out of one daunger into another, that in short space his creete,
which is his moste sustenence, shall be wasted in preying, or killed in
driving, or starved for wante of pasture in the woodes, and he himselfe
brought soe lowe, that he shall have no harte nor abilitye to indure
his wretchednesse, the which will surely come to passe in very short
space; for one winters well following of him will so plucke him on his
knees that he will never be able to stand up agayne.

He could commend this expeditious way from personal knowledge, and
could assure the Queen that the people of the country would soon
consume themselves and devoure one another. The proofs whereof I
saw sufficiently ensampled in these late warres of Mounster; for
notwithstanding that the same was a most rich and plentifull countrey,
full of corne and cattell, that you would have thought they would
have bene able to stand long, yet ere one yeare and a halfe they were
brought to such wretchednesse, as that any stonye heart would have
rued the same. Out of every corner of the woodes and glynnes they came
creeping forth upon theyr hands, for theyr legges could not beare them;
they looked like anatomyes of death, they spake like ghosts crying out
of their graves; they did eate of the dead carrions, happy were they if
they could finde them, yea, and one another soone after, insomuch as
the very carcasses they spared not to scrape out of theyr graves; and
if they found a plot of water-cresses or shamrokes, there they flocked
as to a feast for the time, yet not able long to continue therewithall;
that in short space there were none allmost left, and a most populous
and plentifull countrey suddaynely left voyde of man or beast; yet sure
in all that warre, there perished not many by the sword, but all by the
extremitye of famine.


VI

In a few years the Four Masters were to write the history of that
time, and they were to record the goodness or the badness of Irishman
and Englishman with entire impartiality. They had seen friends and
relatives persecuted, but they would write of that mans poisoning
and this mans charities and of the fall of great houses, and hardly
with any other emotion than a thought of the pitiableness of all life.
Friend and enemy would be for them a part of the spectacle of the
world. They remembered indeed those Anglo-French invaders who conquered
for the sake of their own strong hand, and when they had conquered
became a part of the life about them, singing its songs, when they grew
weary of their own Iseult and Guinevere. But the Four Masters had not
come to understand, as I think, despite famines and exterminations,
that new invaders were among them, who fought for an alien State,
for an alien religion. Such ideas were difficult to them, for they
belonged to the old individual, poetical life, and spoke a language
even in which it was all but impossible to think an abstract thought.
They understood Spain, doubtless, which persecuted in the interests
of religion, but I doubt if anybody in Ireland could have understood
as yet that the Anglo-Saxon nation was beginning to persecute in the
service of ideas it believed to be the foundation of the State. I
doubt if anybody in Ireland saw that with certainty, till the Great
Demagogue had come and turned the old house of the noble into the
house of the Poor, the lonely house, the accursed house of Cromwell.
He came, another Cairbry Cat Head, with that great rabble, who had
overthrown the pageantry of Church and Court, but who turned towards
him faces full of the sadness and docility of their long servitude,
and the old individual, poetical life went down, as it seems, for
ever. He had studied Spensers book and approved of it, as we know,
finding, doubtless, his own head there, for Spenser, a king of the old
race, carried a mirror which showed kings yet to come though but kings
of the mob. Those Bohemian poets of the theatres were wiser, for the
States that touched them nearly were the States where Helen and Dido
had sorrowed, and so their mirrors showed none but beautiful heroical
heads. They wandered in the places that pale passion loves, and were
happy, as one thinks, and troubled little about those marching and
hoarse-throated thoughts that the State has in its pay. They knew
that those marchers, with the dust of so many roads upon them, are
very robust and have great and well-paid generals to write expedient
despatches in sound prose; and they could hear mother earth singing
among her cornfields:

    Weep not, my wanton! smile upon my knee;
    When thou art old theres grief enough for thee.


VII

There are moments when one can read neither Milton nor Spenser,
moments when one recollects nothing but that their flesh had partly
been changed to stone, but there are other moments when one recollects
nothing but those habits of emotion that made the lesser poet
especially a man of an older, more imaginative time. One remembers
that he delighted in smooth pastoral places, because men could be busy
there or gather together there, after their work, that he could love
handiwork and the hum of voices. One remembers that he could still
rejoice in the trees, not because they were images of loneliness and
meditation, but because of their serviceableness. He could praise the
builder oake, the aspine, good for staves, the cypresse funerall,
the eugh, obedient to the benders will, the birch for shaftes,
the sallow for the mill, the mirrhe sweete-bleeding in the bitter
wound, the fruitful olive, and the carver holme. He was of a time
before undelighted labour had made the business of men a desecration.
He carries ones memory back to Virgils and Chaucers praise of trees,
and to the sweet-sounding song made by the old Irish poet in their
praise.

I got up from reading the _Faerie Queene_ the other day and wandered
into another room. It was in a friends house, and I came of a sudden
to the ancient poetry and to our poetry side by sidean engraving
of Claudes Mill hung under an engraving of Turners Temple of
Jupiter. Those dancing country people, those cow-herds, resting after
the days work, and that quiet mill-race made one think of Merry
England with its glad Latin heart, of a time when men in every land
found poetry and imagination in one anothers company and in the days
labour. Those stately goddesses, moving in slow procession towards that
marble architrave among mysterious trees, belong to Shelleys thought,
and to the religion of the wildernessthe only religion possible to
poetry to-day. Certainly Colin Clout, the companionable shepherd, and
Calidor, the courtly man-at-arms, are gone, and Alastor is wandering
from lonely river to river finding happiness in nothing but in that
star where Spenser too had imagined the fountain of perfect things.
This new beauty, in losing so much, has indeed found a new loftiness, a
something of religious exaltation that the old had not. It may be that
those goddesses, moving with a majesty like a procession of the stars,
mean something to the soul of man that those kindly women of the old
poets did not mean, for all the fulness of their breasts and the joyous
gravity of their eyes. Has not the wilderness been at all times a place
of prophecy?


VIII

Our poetry, though it has been a deliberate bringing back of the Latin
joy and the Latin love of beauty, has had to put off the old marching
rhythms, that once delighted more than expedient hearts, in separating
itself from a life where servile hands have become powerful. It has
ceased to have any burden for marching shoulders, since it learned
ecstasy from Smart in his mad cell, and from Blake, who made joyous
little songs out of almost unintelligible visions, and from Keats,
who sang of a beauty so wholly preoccupied with itself that its
contemplation is a kind of lingering trance. The poet, if he would not
carry burdens that are not his and obey the orders of servile lips,
must sit apart in contemplative indolence playing with fragile things.

If one chooses at hazard a Spenserian stanza out of Shelley and
compares it with any stanza by Spenser, one sees the change, though it
would be still more clear if one had chosen a lyrical passage. I will
take a stanza out of _Laon and Cythna_, for that is story-telling and
runs nearer to Spenser than the meditative _Adonais_:

    The meteor to its far morass returned:
    The beating of our veins one interval
    Made still; and then I felt the blood that burned
    Within her frame, mingle with mine, and fall
    Around my heart like fire; and over all
    A mist was spread, the sickness of a deep
    And speechless swoon of joy, as might befall
    Two disunited spirits when they leap
    In union from this earths obscure and fading sleep.

The rhythm is varied and troubled, and the lines, which are in
Spenser like bars of gold thrown ringing one upon another, are broken
capriciously. Nor is the meaning the less an inspiration of indolent
muses, for it wanders hither and thither at the beckoning of fancy. It
is now busy with a meteor and now with throbbing blood that is fire,
and with a mist that is a swoon and a sleep that is life. It is bound
together by the vaguest suggestion, while Spensers verse is always
rushing on to some preordained thought. A popular poet can still
indeed write poetry of the will, just as factory girls wear the fashion
of hat or dress the moneyed classes wore a year ago, but popular
poetry does not belong to the living imagination of the world. Old
writers gave men four temperaments, and they gave the sanguineous
temperament to men of active life, and it is precisely the sanguineous
temperament that is fading out of poetry and most obviously out of
what is most subtle and living in poetryits pulse and breath, its
rhythm. Because poetry belongs to that element in every race which is
most strong, and therefore most individual, the poet is not stirred
to imaginative activity by a life which is surrendering its freedom
to ever new elaboration, organisation, mechanism. He has no longer
a poetical will, and must be content to write out of those parts of
himself which are too delicate and fiery for any deadening exercise.
Every generation has more and more loosened the rhythm, more and more
broken up and disorganised, for the sake of subtlety or detail, those
great rhythms which move, as it were, in masses of sound. Poetry
has become more spiritual, for the soul is of all things the most
delicately organised, but it has lost in weight and measure and in its
power of telling long stories and of dealing with great and complicated
events. _Laon and Cythna_, though I think it rises sometimes into
loftier air than the _Faerie Queene_, and _Endymion_, though its
shepherds and wandering divinities have a stranger and more intense
beauty than Spensers, have need of too watchful and minute attention
for such lengthy poems. In William Morris, indeed, one finds a music
smooth and unexacting like that of the old story-tellers, but not their
energetic pleasure, their rhythmical wills. One too often misses in his
_Earthly Paradise_ the minute ecstasy of modern song without finding
that old happy-go-lucky tune that had kept the story marching.

Spensers contemporaries, writing lyrics or plays full of lyrical
moments, write a verse more delicately organised than his and crowd
more meaning into a phrase than he, but they could not have kept ones
attention through so long a poem. A friend who has a fine ear told me
the other day that she had read all Spenser with delight and yet could
remember only four lines. When she repeated them they were from the
poem by Matthew Roydon, which is bound up with Spenser because it is a
commendation of Sir Philip Sidney:

    A sweet, attractive kind of grace,
    A full assurance given by looks,
    Continual comfort in a face,
    The lineaments of Gospel books.

Yet if one were to put even these lines beside a fine modern song
one would notice that they had a stronger and rougher energy, a
feather-weight more, if eye and ear were fine enough to notice it, of
the active will, of the happiness that comes out of life itself.


IX

I have put into this book[A] only those passages from Spenser that I
want to remember and carry about with me. I have not tried to select
what people call characteristic passages, for that is, I think, the
way to make a dull book. One never really knows anybodys taste but
ones own, and if one likes anything sincerely one may be certain
that there are other people made out of the same earth to like it
too. I have taken out of _The Shepheards Calender_ only those parts
which are about love or about old age, and I have taken out of the
_Faerie Queene_ passages about shepherds and lovers, and fauns and
satyrs, and a few allegorical processions. I find that though I love
symbolism, which is often the only fitting speech for some mystery of
disembodied life, I am for the most part bored by allegory, which is
made, as Blake says, by the daughters of memory, and coldly, with no
wizard frenzy. The processions I have chosen are either those, like
the House of Mammon, that have enough ancient mythology, always an
implicit symbolism, or, like the Cave of Despair, enough sheer passion
to make one forget or forgive their allegory, or else they are, like
that vision of Scudamour, so visionary, so full of a sort of ghostly
midnight animation, that one is persuaded that they had some strange
purpose and did truly appear in just that way to some mind worn out
with war and trouble. The vision of Scudamour is, I sometimes think,
the finest invention in Spenser. Until quite lately I knew nothing of
Spenser but the parts I had read as a boy. I did not know that I had
read so far as that vision, but year after year this thought would rise
up before me coming from I knew not where. I would be alone perhaps
in some old building, and I would think suddenly out of that door
might come a procession of strange people doing mysterious things with
tumult. They would walk over the stone floor, then suddenly vanish,
and everything would become silent again. Once I saw what is called,
I think, a Board School continuation class play _Hamlet_. There was no
stage, but they walked in procession into the midst of a large room
full of visitors and of their friends. While they were walking in,
that thought came to me again from I knew not where. I was alone in a
great church watching ghostly kings and queens setting out upon their
unearthly business.

It was only last summer, when I read the Fourth Book of the _Faerie
Queene_, that I found I had been imagining over and over the enchanted
persecution of Amoret.

I give too, in a section which I call Gardens of Delight, the good
gardens of Adonis and the bad gardens of Phdria and Acrasia, which
are mythological and symbolical, but not allegorical, and show,
more particularly those bad islands, his power of describing bodily
happiness and bodily beauty at its greatest. He seemed always to feel
through the eyes, imagining everything in pictures. Marlowes _Hero and
Leander_ is more energetic in its sensuality, more complicated in its
intellectual energy than this languid story, which pictures always a
happiness that would perish if the desire to which it offers so many
roses lost its indolence and its softness. There is no passion in the
pleasure he has set amid perilous seas, for he would have us understand
that there alone could the war-worn and the sea-worn man find date-less
leisure and unrepining peace.

_October, 1902._




POETRY AND TRADITION


I

WHEN Mr. OLeary died I could not bring myself to go to his funeral,
though I had been once his close fellow-worker, for I shrank from
seeing about his grave so many whose Nationalism was different from
anything he had taught or that I could share. He belonged, as did his
friend John F. Taylor, to the romantic conception of Irish Nationality
on which Lionel Johnson and myself founded, so far as it was founded
on anything but literature, our Art and our Irish criticism. Perhaps
his spirit, if it can care for or can see old friends now, will accept
this apology for an absence that has troubled me. I learned much from
him and much from Taylor, who will always seem to me the greatest
orator I have heard; and that ideal Ireland, perhaps from this out an
imaginary Ireland, in whose service I labour, will always be in many
essentials their Ireland. They were the last to speak an understanding
of life and Nationality, built up by the generation of Grattan, which
read Homer and Virgil, and by the generation of Davis, which had been
pierced through by the idealism of Mazzini,[B] and of the European
revolutionists of the mid-century.

OLeary had joined the Fenian movement with no hope of success as
we know, but because he believed such a movement good for the moral
character of the people; and had taken his long imprisonment without
complaining. Even to the very end, while often speaking of his prison
life, he would have thought it took from his Roman courage to describe
its hardship. The worth of a mans acts in the moral memory, a
continual height of mind in the doing of them, seemed more to him than
their immediate result, if, indeed, the sight of many failures had not
taken away the thought of success. A man was not to lie, or even to
give up his dignity, on any patriotic plea, and I have heard him say,
I have but one religion, the old Persian: to bend the bow and tell
the truth, and again, There are things a man must not do to save a
nation, and again, A man must not cry in public to save a nation,
and that we might not forget justice in the passion of controversy.
There was never cause so bad that it has not been defended by good
men for what seemed to them good reasons. His friend had a burning
and brooding imagination that divided men not according to their
achievement but by their degrees of sincerity, and by their mastery
over a straight and, to my thought, too obvious logic that seemed to
him essential to sincerity. Neither man had an understanding of style
or of literature in the right sense of the word, though both were great
readers, but because their imagination could come to rest no place
short of greatness, they hoped, John OLeary especially, for an Irish
literature of the greatest kind. When Lionel Johnson and Katharine
Tynan (as she was then), and I, myself, began to reform Irish poetry,
we thought to keep unbroken the thread running up to Grattan which
John OLeary had put into our hands, though it might be our business
to explore new paths of the labyrinth. We sought to make a more subtle
rhythm, a more organic form, than that of the older Irish poets who
wrote in English, but always to remember certain ardent ideas and high
attitudes of mind which were the nation itself, to our belief, so far
as a nation can be summarised in the intellect. If you had asked an
ancient Spartan what made Sparta Sparta, he would have answered, The
Laws of Lycurgus, and many Englishmen look back to Bunyan and to Milton
as we did to Grattan and to Mitchell. Lionel Johnson was able to take
up into his Art one portion of this tradition that I could not, for
he had a gift of speaking political thought in fine verse that I have
always lacked. I, on the other hand, was more preoccupied with Ireland
(for he had other interests), and took from Allingham and Walsh their
passion for country spiritism, and from Ferguson his pleasure in heroic
legend, and while seeing all in the light of European literature found
my symbols of expression in Ireland. One thought often possessed me
very strongly. New from the influence, mainly the personal influence,
of William Morris, I dreamed of enlarging Irish hate, till we had
come to hate with a passion of patriotism what Morris and Ruskin
hated. Mitchell had already all but poured some of that hate drawn
from Carlyle, who had it of an earlier and, as I think, cruder sort,
into the blood of Ireland, and were we not a poor nation with ancient
courage, unblackened fields, and a barbarous gift of self-sacrifice?
Ruskin and Morris had spent themselves in vain because they had
found no passion to harness to their thought, but here was unwasted
passion and precedents in the popular memory for every needed thought
and action. Perhaps, too, it would be possible to find in that new
philosophy of spiritism coming to a seeming climax in the work of
Ernest Myers, and in the investigations of uncounted obscure persons,
what could change the country spiritism into a reasoned belief that
would put its might into all the rest. A new belief seemed coming that
could be so simple and demonstratable and above all so mixed into the
common scenery of the world, that it would set the whole man on fire
and liberate him from a thousand obediences and complexities. We were
to forge in Ireland a new sword on our old traditional anvil for that
great battle that must in the end re-establish the old, confident,
joyous world. All the while I worked with this idea, founding societies
that became quickly or slowly everything I despise. One part of me
looked on, mischievous and mocking, and the other part spoke words
which were more and more unreal, as the attitude of mind became more
and more strained and difficult. Madame Maud Gonne could still draw
great crowds out of the slums by her beauty and sincerity, and speak
to them of Mother Ireland with the crown of stars about her head.
But gradually the political movement she was associated with, finding
it hard to build up any fine lasting thing, became content to attack
little persons and little things. All movements are held together
more by what they hate than what they love, for love separates and
individualises and quiets, but the nobler movements, the only movements
on which literature can found itself, hate great and lasting things.
All who have any old traditions, have something of aristocracy, but we
had opposing us from the first, though not strongly from the first,
a type of mind which had been without influence in the generation of
Grattan, and almost without it in that of Davis, and which has made a
new nation out of Ireland, that was once old and full of memories.

I remember, when I was twenty years old, arguing, on my way home from
a Young Ireland Society, that Ireland, with its hieratic Church, its
readiness to accept leadership in intellectual thingsand John OLeary
spoke much of this readiness[C]its Latin hatred of middle paths and
uncompleted arguments, could never create a democratic poet of the
type of Burns, although it had tried to do so more than once, but that
its genius would in the long run be aristocratic and lonely. Whenever
I had known some old countryman, I had heard stories and sayings that
arose out of an imagination that would have understood Homer better
than The Cotters Saturday Night or Highland Mary, because it
was an ancient imagination, where the sediment had found the time to
settle, and I believed that the makers of deliberate literature could
still take passion and theme, though but little thought, from such as
he. On some such old and broken stem, I thought, have all the most
beautiful roses been grafted.


II

   _Him who trembles before the flame and the flood,
    And the winds that blow through the starry ways;
    Let the starry winds and the flame and the flood
    Cover over and hide, for he has no part
    With the proud, majestical, multitude._

THREE types of men have made all beautiful things. Aristocracies have
made beautiful manners, because their place in the world puts them
above the fear of life, and the countrymen have made beautiful stories
and beliefs, because they have nothing to lose and so do not fear,
and the artists have made all the rest, because Providence has filled
them with recklessness. All these look backward to a long tradition,
for, being without fear, they have held to whatever pleased them. The
others being always anxious have come to possess little that is good
in itself, and are always changing from thing to thing, for whatever
they do or have must be a means to something else, and they have so
little belief that anything can be an end in itself, that they cannot
understand you if you say All the most valuable things are useless.
They prefer the stalk to the flower, and believe that painting and
poetry exist that there may be instruction, and love that there may
be children, and theatres that busy men may rest, and holidays that
busy men may go on being busy. At all times they fear and even hate
the things that have worth in themselves, for that worth may suddenly,
as it were a fire, consume their book of Life, where the world is
represented by cyphers and symbols; and before all else, they fear
irreverent joy and unserviceable sorrow. It seems to them, that those
who have been freed by position, by poverty, or by the traditions of
Art, have something terrible about them, a light that is unendurable
to eyesight. They complain much of that commandment that we can do
almost what we will, if we do it gaily, and think that freedom is but a
trifling with the world.

If we would find a company of our own way of thinking, we must go
backward to turreted walls, to courts, to high rocky places, to little
walled towns, to jesters like that jester of Charles the Fifth who made
mirth out of his own death; to the Duke Guidobaldo in his sickness, or
Duke Frederick in his strength, to all those who understood that life
is not lived at all, if not lived for contemplation or excitement.

Certainly we could not delight in that so courtly thing, the poetry
of light love, if it were sad; for only when we are gay over a thing,
and can play with it, do we show ourselves its master, and have minds
clear enough for strength. The raging fire and the destructive sword
are portions of eternity, too great for the eye of man, wrote Blake,
and it is only before such things, before a love like that of Tristan
and Iseult, before noble or ennobled death, that the free mind permits
itself aught but brief sorrow. That we may be free from all the rest,
sullen anger, solemn virtue, calculating anxiety, gloomy suspicion,
prevaricating hope, we should be reborn in gaiety. Because there is
submission in a pure sorrow, we should sorrow alone over what is
greater than ourselves, nor too soon admit that greatness, but all that
is less than we are should stir us to some joy, for pure joy masters
and impregnates; and so to world end, strength shall laugh and wisdom
mourn.


III

IN life, courtesy and self-possession, and in the arts style, are
the sensible impressions of the free mind, for both arise out of a
deliberate shaping of all things, and from never being swept away,
whatever the emotion, into confusion or dulness. The Japanese have
numbered with heroic things courtesy at all times whatsoever, and
though a writer, who has to withdraw so much of his thought out of his
life that he may learn his craft, may find many his betters in daily
courtesy, he should never be without style, which is but high breeding
in words and in argument. He is indeed the Creator of the standards of
manners in their subtlety, for he alone can know the ancient records
and be like some mystic courtier who has stolen the keys from the
girdle of time, and can wander where it please him amid the splendours
of ancient courts.

Sometimes, it may be, he is permitted the license of cap and bell, or
even the madmans bunch of straws, but he never forgets or leaves at
home the seal and the signature. He has at all times the freedom of the
well-bred, and being bred to the tact of words can take what theme he
pleases, unlike the bourgeoisie, who are rightly compelled to be very
strict in their conversation. Who should be free if he were not? for
none other has a continual deliberate self-delighting happinessstyle,
the only thing that is immortal in literature, as Sainte-Beuve has
said, a still unexpended energy, after all that the argument or the
story need, a still unbroken pleasure after the immediate end has
been accomplishedand builds this up into a most personal and wilful
fire, transfiguring words and sounds and events. It is the playing of
strength when the days work is done, a secret between a craftsman and
his craft, and is so inseparate in his nature, that he has it most of
all amid overwhelming emotion, and in the face of death. Shakespeares
persons when the last darkness has gathered about them, speak out of an
ecstasy that is one half the self-surrender of sorrow, and one half the
last playing and mockery of the victorious sword, before the defeated
world.

It is in the arrangement of events as in the words, and in that touch
of extravagance, of irony, of surprise, which is set there after the
desire of logic has been satisfied and all that is merely necessary
established, and that leaves one, not in the circling necessity, but
caught up into the freedom of self-delight; as it were, the foam upon
the cup, the long pheasants feather on the horses head, the spread
peacock over the pasty. If it be very conscious, very deliberate, as it
may be in comedy, for comedy is more personal than tragedy, we call it
phantasy, perhaps even mischievous phantasy, recognising how disturbing
it is to all that drag a ball at the ankle. This joy, because it
must be always making and mastering, remains in the hands and in the
tongue of the artist, but with his eyes he enters upon a submissive,
sorrowful contemplation of the great irremediable things, and he is
known from other men by making all he handles like himself, and yet
by the unlikeness to himself of all that comes before him in a pure
contemplation. It may have been his enemy or his love or his cause that
set him dreaming, and certainly the phnix can but open her young wings
in a flaming nest; but all hate and hope vanishes in the dream, and if
his mistress brag of the song or his enemy fear it, it is not that
either has its praise or blame, but that the twigs of the holy nest
are not easily set afire. The verses may make his mistress famous as
Helen or give a victory to his cause, not because he has been eithers
servant, but because men delight to honour and to remember all that
have served contemplation. It had been easier to fight, to die even,
for Charless house with Marvels poem in the memory, but there is no
zeal of service that had not been an impurity in the pure soil where
the marvel grew. Timon of Athens contemplates his own end, and orders
his tomb by the beachy margent of the flood, and Cleopatra sets the
asp to her bosom, and their words move us because their sorrow is not
their own at tomb or asp, but for all mens fate. That shaping joy has
kept the sorrow pure, as it had kept it were the emotion love or hate,
for the nobleness of the Arts is in the mingling of contraries, the
extremity of sorrow, the extremity of joy, perfection of personality,
the perfection of its surrender, overflowing turbulent energy, and
marmorean stillness; and its red rose opens at the meeting of the two
beams of the cross, and at the trysting-place of mortal and immortal,
time and eternity. No new man has ever plucked that rose, or found
that trysting-place, for he could but come to the understanding of
himself, to the mastery of unlocking words after long frequenting of
the great Masters, hardly without ancestral memory of the like. Even
knowledge is not enough, for the recklessness or negligence which
Castiglione thought necessary in good manners is necessary in this
likewise, and if a man has it not he will be gloomy, and had better to
his marketing again.


IV

WHEN I saw John OLeary first, every young Catholic man who had
intellectual ambition fed his imagination with the poetry of Young
Ireland; and the verses of even the least known of its poets were
expounded with a devout ardour at Young Ireland Societies and the like,
and their birthdays celebrated. The School of writers I belonged to,
tried to found itself on much of the subject-matter of this poetry,
and, what was almost more in our thoughts, to begin a more imaginative
tradition in Irish literature, by a criticism at once remorseless and
enthusiastic. It was our criticism, I think, that set Clarence Mangan
at the head of the Young Ireland poets in the place of Davis, and put
Sir Samuel Ferguson, who had died with but little fame as a poet,
next in the succession. Our attacks, mine especially, on verse which
owed its position to its moral or political worth, roused a resentment
which even I find it hard to imagine to-day, and our verse was attacked
in return, and not for anything peculiar to ourselves, but for all
that it had in common with the accepted poetry of the world, and most
of all for its lack of rhetoric, its refusal to preach a doctrine or
to consider the seeming necessities of a cause. Now, after so many
years, I can see how natural, how poetical even, an opposition was,
that shows what large numbers could not call up certain high feelings
without accustomed verses, or believe we had not wronged the feeling
when we did but attack the verses. I have just read in a newspaper that
Sir Charles Gavan Duffy recited before his death his favourite poem,
one of the worst of the patriotic poems of Young Ireland, and it has
brought all this to mind, for the opposition to our School claimed him
as its leader. When I was at Siena, I noticed that the Byzantine style
persisted in faces of Madonnas for several generations after it had
given way to a more natural style, in the less loved faces of saints
and martyrs. Passion had grown accustomed to those sloping and narrow
eyes, which are almost Japanese, and to those gaunt cheeks, and would
have thought it sacrilege to change. We would not, it is likely, have
found listeners if John OLeary, the irreproachable patriot, had not
supported us. It was as clear to him that a writer must not write
badly, or ignore the examples of the great masters in the fancied or
real service of a cause, as it was that he must not lie for it or grow
hysterical. I believed in those days that a new intellectual life would
begin, like that of Young Ireland, but more profound and personal,
and that could we but get a few plain principles accepted, new poets
and writers of prose would make an immortal music. I think I was more
blind than Johnson, though I judge this from his poems rather than
anything I remember of his talk, for he never talked ideas, but, as was
common with his generation in Oxford, facts and immediate impressions
from life. With others this renunciation was but a pose, a superficial
reaction from the disordered abundance of the middle century, but with
him it was the radical life. He was in all a traditionalist, gathering
out of the past phrases, moods, attitudes, and disliking ideas less
for their uncertainty than because they made the mind itself changing
and restless. He measured the Irish tradition by another greater
than itself, and was quick to feel any falling asunder of the two,
yet at many moments they seemed but one in his imagination. Ireland,
all through his poem of that name, speaks to him with the voice of
the great poets, and in Ireland Dead she is still mother of perfect
heroism, but there doubt comes too.

    Can it be they do repent
    That they went, thy chivalry,
    Those sad ways magnificent.

And in Ways of War, dedicated to John OLeary, he dismissed the
belief in an heroic Ireland as but a dream.

    A dream! A dream! an ancient dream!
    Yet ere peace come to Innisfail,
    Some weapons on some field must gleam,
    Some burning glory fire the Gael.

    That field may lie beneath the sun,
    Fair for the treading of an host:
    That field in realms of thought be won,
    And armed hands do their uttermost:

    Some way, to faithful Innisfail,
    Shall come the majesty and awe
    Of martial truth, that must prevail
    To lay on all the eternal law.

I do not think either of us saw that, as belief in the possibility of
armed insurrection withered, the old romantic nationalism would wither
too, and that the young would become less ready to find pleasure in
whatever they believed to be literature. Poetical tragedy, and indeed
all the more intense forms of literature, had lost their hold on the
general mass of men in other countries as life grew safe, and the sense
of comedy which is the social bond in times of peace as tragic feeling
is in times of war, had become the inspiration of popular art. I always
knew this, but I believed that the memory of danger, and the reality
of it seemed near enough sometimes, would last long enough to give
Ireland her imaginative opportunity. I could not foresee that a new
class, which had begun to rise into power under the shadow of Parnell,
would change the nature of the Irish movement, which, needing no longer
great sacrifices, nor bringing any great risk to individuals, could
do without exceptional men, and those activities of the mind that are
founded on the exceptional moment.[D] John OLeary had spent much of
his thought in an unavailing war with the agrarian party, believing it
the root of change, but the fox that crept into the badgers hole did
not come from there. Power passed to small shop-keepers, to clerks,
to that very class who had seemed to John OLeary so ready to bend to
the power of others, to men who had risen above the traditions of the
countryman, without learning those of cultivated life or even educating
themselves, and who because of their poverty, their ignorance, their
superstitious piety, are much subject to all kinds of fear. Immediate
victory, immediate utility, became everything, and the conviction,
which is in all who have run great risks for a causes sake, in the
OLearys and Mazzinis as in all rich natures, that life is greater than
the cause, withered, and we artists, who are the servants not of any
cause but of mere naked life, and above all of that life in its nobler
forms, where joy and sorrow are one, Artificers of the Great Moment,
became as elsewhere in Europe protesting individual voices. Irelands
great moment had passed, and she had filled no roomy vessels with
strong sweet wine, where we have filled our porcelain jars against the
coming winter.

_August, 1907._




MODERN IRISH POETRY

_Included by kind permission of Messrs. Methuen & Co._


THE Irish Celt is sociable, as may be known from his proverb, It is
better to be quarreling than to be lonely, and the Irish poets of the
nineteenth century have made songs abundantly when friends and rebels
have been at hand to applaud. The Irish poets of the eighteenth century
found both at a Limerick hostelry, above whose door was written a
rhyming welcome in Gaelic to all passing poets, whether their pockets
were full or empty. Its owner, himself a famous poet, entertained his
fellows as long as his money lasted, and then took to minding the hens
and chickens of an old peasant woman for a living, and ended his days
in rags, but not, one imagines, without content. Among his friends and
guests had been Red OSullivan, Gaelic OSullivan, blind OHeffernan,
and many another, and their songs had made the people, crushed by the
disasters of the Boyne and Aughrim, remember their ancient greatness.

The bardic order, with its perfect artifice and imperfect art, had gone
down in the wars of the seventeenth century, and poetry had found
shelter amid the turf smoke of the cabins. The powers that history
commemorates are but the coarse effects of influences delicate and
vague as the beginning of twilight, and these influences were to be
woven like a web about the hearts of men by farm-labourers, pedlars,
potato-diggers, hedge-schoolmasters, and grinders at the quern, poor
wastrels who put the troubles of their native land, or their own happy
or unhappy loves, into songs of an extreme beauty. But in the midst
of this beauty was a flitting incoherence, a fitful dying out of the
sense, as though the passion had become too great for words, as must
needs be when life is the master and not the slave of the singer.

English-speaking Ireland had meanwhile no poetic voice, for Goldsmith
had chosen to celebrate English scenery and manners; and Swift was but
an Irishman by what Mr. Balfour has called the visitation of God, and
much against his will; and Congreve by education and early association;
while Parnell, Denham, and Roscommon were poets but to their own time.
Nor did the coming with the new century of the fame of Moore set the
balance even, for his Irish melodies are too often artificial and
mechanical in their style when separated from the music that gave them
wings. Whatever he had of high poetry is in _The Light of Other Days_
and in _At the Mid Hour of Night_, which express what Matthew Arnold
has taught us to call the Celtic melancholy, with so much of delicate
beauty in the meaning and in the wavering or steady rhythm that one
knows not where to find their like in literature. His more artificial
and mechanical verse, because of the ancient music that makes it seem
natural and vivid, and because it has remembered so many beloved names
and events and places, has had the influence which might have belonged
to these exquisite verses had he written none but these.

An honest style did not come into English-speaking Ireland until
Callanan wrote three or four naive translations from the Gaelic. _Shule
Aroon_ and _Kathleen OMore_ had indeed been written for a good while,
but had no more influence than Moores best verses. Now, however, the
lead of Callanan was followed by a number of translators, and they
in turn by the poets of Young Ireland, who mingled a little learned
from the Gaelic ballad-writers with a great deal learned from Scott,
Macaulay, and Campbell, and turned poetry once again into a principal
means for spreading ideas of nationality and patriotism. They were full
of earnestness, but never understand that, though a poet may govern
his life by his enthusiasms, he must, when he sits down at his desk,
but use them as the potter the clay. Their thoughts were a little
insincere, because they lived in the half-illusions of their admirable
ideals; and their rhythms not seldom mechanical, because their purpose
was served when they had satisfied the dull ears of the common man.
They had no time to listen to the voice of the insatiable artist, who
stands erect, or lies asleep waiting until a breath arouses him, in
the art of every craftsman. Life was their master, as it had been the
master of the poets who gathered in the Limerick hostelry, though it
conquered them not by unreasoned love for a woman, or for native land,
but by reasoned enthusiasm, and practical energy. No man was more
sincere, no man had a less mechanical mind than Thomas Davis, and yet
he is often a little insincere and mechanical in his verse. When he sat
down to write he had so great a desire to make the peasantry courageous
and powerful that he half believed them already the finest peasantry
upon the earth, and wrote not a few such verses as

    Lead him to fight for native land,
      His is no courage cold and wary;
    The troops live not that could withstand
      The headlong charge of Tipperary

and to-day we are paying the reckoning with much bombast. His little
book has many things of this kind, and yet we honour it for its public
spirit, and recognize its powerful influence with gratitude. He was in
the main an orator influencing mens acts, and not a poet shaping their
emotions, and the bulk of his influence has been good. He was, indeed,
a poet of much tenderness in the simple love-songs _The Marriage_,
_A Plea for Love_, and _Mary Bhan Astr_, and, but for his ideal of
a fisherman defying a foreign soldiery, would have been as good in
_The Boatman of Kinsale_; and once or twice when he touched upon some
historic sorrow he forgot his hopes for the future and his lessons for
the present, and made moving verse.

His contemporary, Clarence Mangan, kept out of public life and its
half-illusions by a passion for books, and for drink and opium, made
an imaginative and powerful style. He translated from the German, and
imitated Oriental poetry, but little that he did on any but Irish
subjects has a lasting interest. He is usually classed with the Young
Ireland poets, because he contributed to their periodicals and shared
their political views; but his style was formed before their movement
began, and he found it the more easy for this reason, perhaps, to give
sincere expression to the mood which he had chosen, the only sincerity
literature knows of; and with happiness and cultivation might have
displaced Moore. But as it was, whenever he had no fine ancient song
to inspire him, he fell into rhetoric which was only lifted out of
commonplace by an arid intensity. In his _Irish National Hymn_, _Soul
and Country_, and the like, we look into a mind full of parched sands
where the sweet dews have never fallen. A miserable man may think well
and express himself with great vehemence, but he cannot make beautiful
things, for Aphrodite never rises from any but a tide of joy. Mangan
knew nothing of the happiness of the outer man, and it was only when
prolonging the tragic exultation of some dead bard that he knew the
unearthly happiness which clouds the outer man with sorrow, and is
the fountain of impassioned art. Like those who had gone before him,
he was the slave of life, for he had nothing of the self-knowledge,
the power of selection, the harmony of mind, which enables the poet
to be its master, and to mould the world to a trumpet for his lips.
But OHusseys Ode over his outcast chief must live for generations
because of the passion that moves through its powerful images and its
mournful, wayward, and fierce rhythms.

    Though he were even a wolf ranging the round green woods,
    Though he were even a pleasant salmon in the unchainable sea,
    Though he were a wild mountain eagle, he could scarce bear, he,
        This sharp, sore sleet, these howling floods.

Edward Walsh, a village schoolmaster, who hovered, like Mangan, on the
edge of the Young Ireland movement, did many beautiful translations
from the Gaelic; and Michael Doheny, while out on his keeping in
the mountains after the collapse at Ballingarry, made one of the
most moving of ballads; but in the main the poets who gathered about
Thomas Davis, and whose work has come down to us in _The Spirit of the
Nation_, were of practical and political, not of literary, importance.

Meanwhile Samuel Ferguson, William Allingham, and Aubrey de Vere were
working apart from politics; Ferguson selecting his subjects from the
traditions of the bardic age, and Allingham from those of his native
Ballyshannon, and Aubrey de Vere wavering between English, Irish,
and Catholic tradition. They were wiser than Young Ireland in the
choice of their models, for, while drawing not less from purely Irish
sources, they turned to the great poets of the world, Aubrey de Vere
owing something of his gravity to Wordsworth, Ferguson much of his
simplicity to Homer, while Allingham had trained an ear, too delicate
to catch the tune of but a single master, upon the lyric poetry of many
lands. Allingham was the best artist, but Ferguson had the more ample
imagination, the more epic aim. He had not the subtlety of feeling,
the variety of cadence of a great lyric poet, but he has touched, here
and there, an epic vastness and _navet_, as in the description in
_Congal_ of the mire-stiffened mantle of the giant spectre Mananan mac
Lir striking against his calves with as loud a noise as the mainsail of
a ship when with the coil of all its ropes it beat the sounding mast.
He is frequently dull, for he often lacked the minutely appropriate
words necessary to embody those fine changes of feeling which enthral
the attention; but his sense of weight and size, of action and tumult,
has set him apart and solitary, an epic figure in a lyric age.

Allingham, whose pleasant destiny has made him the poet of his native
town, and put _The Winding Banks of Erne_ into the mouths of the
ballad-singers of Ballyshannon, is, on the other hand, a master of
minutely appropriate words, and can wring from the luxurious sadness
of the lover, from the austere sadness of old age, the last golden drop
of beauty; but amid action and tumult he can but fold his hands. He is
the poet of the melancholy peasantry of the West, and, as years go on,
and voluminous histories and copious romances drop under the horizon,
will take his place among those minor immortals who have put their
souls into little songs to humble the proud.

The poetry of Aubrey de Vere has less architecture than the poetry
of Ferguson and Allingham, and more meditation. Indeed, his few but
ever memorable successes are enchanted islands in gray seas of stately
impersonal reverie and description, which drift by and leave no
definite recollection. One needs, perhaps, to perfectly enjoy him, a
Dominican habit, a cloister, and a breviary.

These three poets published much of their best work before and during
the Fenian movement, which, like Young Ireland, had its poets, though
but a small number. Charles Kickham, one of the triumvirate that
controlled it in Ireland; John Casey, a clerk in a flour-mill; and
Ellen OLeary, the sister of Mr. John OLeary, were at times very
excellent. Their verse lacks, curiously enough, the oratorical
vehemence of Young Ireland, and is plaintive and idyllic. The agrarian
movement that followed produced but little poetry, and of that little
all is forgotten but a vehement poem by Fanny Parnell and a couple of
songs by T. D. Sullivan, who is a good song-writer, though not, as the
writer has read on an election placard, one of the greatest poets who
ever moved the heart of man. But while Nationalist verse has ceased to
be a portion of the propaganda of a party, it has been written, and is
being written, under the influence of the Nationalist newspapers and
of Young Ireland societies and the like. With an exacting conscience,
and better models than Thomas Moore and the Young Irelanders, such
beautiful enthusiasm could not fail to make some beautiful verses.
But, as things are, the rhythms are mechanical, and the metaphors
conventional; and inspiration is too often worshipped as a Familiar who
labours while you sleep, or forget, or do many worthy things which are
not spiritual things.

For the most part, the Irishman of our times loves so deeply those arts
which build up a gallant personality, rapid writing, ready talking,
effective speaking to crowds, that he has no thought for the arts which
consume the personality in solitude. He loves the mortal arts which
have given him a lure to take the hearts of men, and shrinks from the
immortal, which could but divide him from his fellows. And in this
century, he who does not strive to be a perfect craftsman achieves
nothing. The poor peasant of the eighteenth century could make fine
ballads by abandoning himself to the joy or sorrow of the moment, as
the reeds abandon themselves to the wind which sighs through them,
because he had about him a world where all was old enough to be steeped
in emotion. But we cannot take to ourselves, by merely thrusting out
our hands, all we need of pomp and symbol, and if we have not the
desire of artistic perfection for an ark, the deluge of incoherence,
vulgarity, and triviality will pass over our heads. If we had no other
symbols but the tumult of the sea, the rusted gold of the thatch, the
redness of the quicken-berry, and had never known the rhetoric of the
platform and of the newspaper, we could do without laborious selection
and rejection; but, even then, though we might do much that would be
delightful, that would inspire coming times, it would not have the
manner of the greatest poetry.

Here and there, the Nationalist newspapers and the Young Ireland
societies have trained a writer who, though busy with the old models,
has some imaginative energy; while the more literary writers, the
successors of Allingham and Ferguson and De Vere, are generally more
anxious to influence and understand Irish thought than any of their
predecessors who did not take the substance of their poetry from
politics. They are distinguished too by their deliberate art, and by
their preoccupation with spiritual passions and memories.

The poetry of Lionel Johnson and Mrs. Hinkson is Catholic and devout,
but Lionel Johnsons is lofty and austere, and like De Veres never
long forgets the greatness of his Church and the interior life whose
expression it is, while Mrs. Hinkson is happiest when she puts
emotions, that have the innocence of childhood, into symbols and
metaphors from the green world about her. She has no reverie nor
speculation, but a devout tenderness like that of St. Francis for
weak instinctive things, old gardeners, old fishermen, birds among
the leaves, birds tossed upon the waters. Miss Hopper belongs to that
school of writers which embodies passions, that are not the less
spiritual because no Church has put them into prayers, in stories and
symbols from old Celtic poetry and mythology. The poetry of A.E., at
its best, finds its symbols and its stories in the soul itself, and
has a more disembodied ecstasy than any poetry of our time. He is the
chief poet of the school of Irish mystics, in which there are many
poets besides many who have heard the words, If ye know these things,
happy are ye if ye do them, and thought the labours that bring the
mystic vision more important than the labours of any craft.

Mr. Herbert Trench and Mrs. Shorter and Moira ONeill are more
interested in the picturesqueness of the world than in religion. Mr.
Trench and Mrs. Shorter have put old Irish stories into vigorous modern
rhyme, and have written, the one in her _Ceann Dubh Deelish_ and the
other in _Come, let us make Love deathless_, lyrics that should become
a lasting part of Irish lyric poetry. Moira ONeill has written
pretty lyrics of Antrim life; but one discovers that Mrs. Hinkson or
Miss Hopper, although their work is probably less popular, comes nearer
to the peasant passion, when one compares their work and hers with
that Gaelic song translated so beautifully by Dr. Sigerson, where a
ragged man of the roads, having lost all else, is yet thankful for the
great love gift of sorrow, or with many songs translated by Dr. Hyde
in his _Love Songs of Connacht_, or by Lady Gregory in her _Poets and
Dreamers_.

Except some few Catholic and mystical poets and Professor Dowden in
one or two poems, no Irishman living in Ireland has sung excellently
of any but a theme from Irish experience, Irish history, or Irish
tradition. Trinity College, which desires to be English, has been the
mother of many verse writers and of few poets; and this can only be
because she has set herself against the national genius, and taught her
children to imitate alien styles and choose out alien themes, for it
is not possible to believe that the educated Irishman alone is prosaic
and uninventive. Her few poets have been awakened by the influence of
the farm-labourers, potato-diggers, pedlars, and hedge-schoolmasters
of the eighteenth century, and their imitators in this, and not by a
scholastic life, which, for reasons easy for all to understand and for
many to forgive, has refused the ideals of Ireland, while those of
England are but far-off murmurs. An enemy to all enthusiasms, because
all enthusiasms seemed her enemies, she has taught her children to look
neither to the world about them, nor into their own souls, where some
dangerous fire might slumber.

To remember that in Ireland the professional and landed classes have
been through the mould of Trinity College or of English universities,
and are ignorant of the very names of the best Irish writers, is to
know how strong a wind blows from the ancient legends of Ireland,
how vigorous an impulse to create is in her heart to-day. Deserted
by the classes from among whom has come the bulk of the worlds
intellect, she struggles on, gradually ridding herself of incoherence
and triviality, and slowly building up a literature in English, which,
whether important or unimportant, grows always more unlike others; nor
does it seem as if she would long lack a living literature in Gaelic,
for the movement for the preservation of Gaelic, which has been so much
more successful than anybody foresaw, has already its poets. Dr. Hyde
has written Gaelic poems which pass from mouth to mouth in the west
of Ireland. The country people have themselves fitted them to ancient
airs, and many that can neither read nor write sing them in Donegal and
Connemara and Galway. I have, indeed, but little doubt that Ireland,
communing with herself in Gaelic more and more, but speaking to foreign
countries in English, will lead many that are sick with theories and
with trivial emotion to some sweet well-waters of primeval poetry.

       *       *       *       *       *

_P.S._This essay, written in 1895, though revised from time to time,
sounds strangely to my ears to-day. I still admire much that I then
admired, but if I rewrote it now I should take more pleasure in the
temper of our writers and deal more sternly with their achievement.
The magnanimous integrity of their politics, and their own gallant
impetuous minds, needed no commendation among the young Irishmen for
whom I wrote, and a very little dispraise of their verses seemed an
attack upon the nation itself. Taylor, the orator, a man of genius and
of great learning, never forgave me what I have said of Davis here and
elsewhere, and it is easier for me to understand his anger in this year
than thirteen years ago when the lofty thought of men like Taylor and
OLeary was the strength of Irish nationality. A new tradition is being
built up on Gaelic poetry and romance and on the writings of the school
I belong to, but the very strength of the new foundations, their lack
of obvious generalization, their instinctive nature, the impossibility
of ill-educated minds shaping the finer material, has for the moment
marred the moral temper among those who are young enough to feel the
change.

_April, 1908._




LADY GREGORYS _CUCHULAIN OF MUIRTHEMNE_

    Mr. Bullen has just shown me the fifth volume of this
    edition of my writings, and I discover that a note to
    the stories of _Red Hanrahan_ has been forgotten by the
    printer. That note should have said that I owe thanks
    to Lady Gregory, who helped me to rewrite the stories
    of _Red Hanrahan_ in the beautiful country speech of
    Kiltartan, and nearer to the tradition of the people
    among whom he, or some likeness of him, drifted and is
    remembered._April 14, 1908._


I

I THINK this book is the best that has come out of Ireland in my
time. Perhaps I should say that it is the best book that has ever
come out of Ireland; for the stories which it tells are a chief part
of Irelands gift to the imagination of the worldand it tells them
perfectly for the first time. Translators from the Irish have hitherto
retold one story or the other from some one version, and not often
with any fine understanding of English, of those changes of rhythm,
for instance, that are changes of the sense. They have translated
the best and fullest manuscripts they knew, as accurately as they
could, and that is all we have the right to expect from the first
translators of a difficult and old literature. But few of the stories
really begin to exist as great works of imagination until somebody
has taken the best out of many manuscripts. Sometimes, as in Lady
Gregorys version of _Deirdre_, a dozen manuscripts have to give their
best before the beads are ready for the necklace. It has been as
necessary also to leave out as to add, for generations of copyists,
who had often but little sympathy with the stories they copied, have
mixed versions together in a clumsy fashion, often repeating one
incident several times, and every century has ornamented what was once
a simple story with its own often extravagant ornament. One does not
perhaps exaggerate when one says that no story has come down to us in
the form it had when the story-teller told it in the winter evenings.
Lady Gregory has done her work of compression and selection at once so
firmly and so reverently that I cannot believe that anybody, except now
and then for a scientific purpose, will need another text than this,
or than the version[E] of it the Gaelic League has begun to publish in
Modern Irish. When she has added her translations from other cycles,
she will have given Ireland its _Mabinogion_, its _Morte DArthur_,
its _Nibelungenlied_. She has already put a great mass of stories,
in which the ancient heart of Ireland still lives, into a shape at
once harmonious and characteristic; and without writing more than a
very few sentences of her own to link together incidents or thoughts
taken from different manuscripts, without adding more indeed than
the story-teller must often have added to amend the hesitation of a
moment. Perhaps more than all, she has discovered a fitting dialect to
tell them in. Some years ago I wrote some stories of medival Irish
life, and as I wrote I was sometimes made wretched by the thought
that I knew of no kind of English that befitted them as the language
of Morriss prose storiesthat lovely crooked languagebefitted his
journeys to woods and wells beyond the world. I knew of no language
to write about Ireland in but our too smooth, too straight, too
logical modern English; but now Lady Gregory has discovered a speech
as beautiful as that of Morris, and a living speech into the bargain.
As she lived among her people she grew to love the beautiful speech
of those who think in Irish, and to understand that it is as true a
dialect of English as the dialect that Burns wrote in. It is some
hundreds of years old, and age gives a language authority. One finds in
it the vocabulary of the translators of the Bible, joined to an idiom
which makes it tender, compassionate, and complaisant, like the Irish
language itself. It is certainly well suited to clothe a literature
which never ceased to be folk-lore even when it was recited in the
Courts of Kings.


II

Lady Gregory could with less trouble have made a book that would have
better pleased the hasty reader. She could have plucked away details,
smoothed out characteristics till she had left nothing but the bare
stories; but a book of that kind would never have called up the past,
or stirred the imagination of a painter or a poet, and would be as
little thought of in a few years as if it had been a popular novel.

The abundance of what may seem at first irrelevant invention in a story
like the death of Conaire, is essential if we are to recall a time when
people were in love with a story, and gave themselves up to imagination
as if to a lover. One may think there are too many lyrical outbursts,
or too many enigmatical symbols here and there in some other story,
but delight will always overtake one in the end. One comes to accept
without reserve an art that is half epical, half lyrical, like that
of the historical parts of the Bible, the art of a time when perhaps
men passed more readily than they do now from one mood to another, and
found it harder than we do to keep to the mood in which one tots up
figures or banters a friend.


III

The Church when it was most powerful created an imaginative unity, for
it taught learned and unlearned to climb, as it were, to the great
moral realities through hierarchies of Cherubim and Seraphim, through
clouds of Saints and Angels who had all their precise duties and
privileges. The story-tellers of Ireland, perhaps of every primitive
country, created a like unity, only it was to the great sthetic
realities that they taught people to climb. They created for learned
and unlearned alike, a communion of heroes, a cloud of stalwart
witnesses; but because they were as much excited as a monk over his
prayers, they did not think sufficiently about the shape of the poem
and the story. One has to get a little weary or a little distrustful
of ones subject, perhaps, before one can lie awake thinking how one
will make the most of it. They were more anxious to describe energetic
characters, and to invent beautiful stories, than to express themselves
with perfect dramatic logic or in perfectly-ordered words. They
shared their characters and their stories, their very images, with
one another, and handed them down from generation to generation; for
nobody, even when he had added some new trait, or some new incident,
thought of claiming for himself what so obviously lived its own merry
or mournful life. The wood-carver who first put a sword into St.
Michaels hand would have as soon claimed as his own a thought which
was perhaps put into his mind by St. Michael himself. The Irish poets
had also, it may be, what seemed a supernatural sanction, for a chief
poet had to understand not only innumerable kinds of poetry, but how
to keep himself for nine days in a trance. They certainly believed in
the historical reality of even their wildest imaginations. And so soon
as Christianity made their hearers desire a chronology that would run
side by side with that of the Bible, they delighted in arranging their
Kings and Queens, the shadows of forgotten mythologies, in long lines
that ascended to Adam and his Garden. Those who listened to them must
have felt as if the living were like rabbits digging their burrows
under walls that had been built by Gods and Giants, or like swallows
building their nests in the stone mouths of immense images, carved by
nobody knows who. It is no wonder that one sometimes hears about men
who saw in a vision ivy-leaves that were greater than shields, and
blackbirds whose thighs were like the thighs of oxen. The fruit of all
those stories, unless indeed the finest activities of the mind are but
a pastime, is the quick intelligence, the abundant imagination, the
courtly manners of the Irish country people.


IV

William Morris came to Dublin when I was a boy, and I had some talk
with him about these old stories. He had intended to lecture upon them,
but the ladies and gentlemenhe put a communistic fervour of hatred
into the phraseknew nothing about them. He spoke of the Irish account
of the battle of Clontarf and of the Norse account, and said, that one
saw the Norse and Irish tempers in the two accounts. The Norseman was
interested in the way things are done, but the Irishman turned aside,
evidently well pleased to be out of so dull a business, to describe
beautiful supernatural events. He was thinking, I suppose, of the
young man who came from Aoibhill of the Grey Rock, giving up immortal
love and youth, that he might fight and die by Murroughs side. He
said that the Norseman had the dramatic temper, and the Irishman had
the lyrical. I think I should have said with Professor Ker, epical
and romantic rather than dramatic and lyrical, but his words, which
have so great an authority, mark the distinction very well, and not
only between Irish and Norse, but between Irish and other un-Celtic
literatures. The Irish story-teller could not interest himself with an
unbroken interest in the way men like himself burned a house, or won
wives no more wonderful than themselves. His mind constantly escaped
out of daily circumstance, as a bough that has been held down by a
weak hand suddenly straightens itself out. His imagination was always
running to Tir-nan-og, to the Land of Promise, which is as near to the
country-people of to-day as it was to Cuchulain and his companions.
His belief in its nearness, cherished in its turn the lyrical temper,
which is always athirst for an emotion, a beauty which cannot be found
in its perfection upon earth, or only for a moment. His imagination,
which had not been able to believe in Cuchulains greatness, until it
had brought the Great Queen, the red-eyebrowed goddess, to woo him
upon the battlefield, could not be satisfied with a friendship less
romantic and lyrical than that of Cuchulain and Ferdiad, who kissed
one another after the days fighting, or with a love less romantic
and lyrical than that of Baile and Aillinn, who died at the report
of one anothers deaths, and married in Tir-nan-og. His art, too, is
often at its greatest when it is most extravagant, for he only feels
himself among solid things, among things with fixed laws and satisfying
purposes, when he has reshaped the world according to his hearts
desire. He understands as well as Blake that the ruins of time build
mansions in eternity, and he never allows anything, that we can see
and handle, to remain long unchanged. The characters must remain the
same, but the strength of Fergus may change so greatly, that he, who a
moment before was merely a strong man among many, becomes the master
of Three Blows that would destroy an army, did they not cut off the
heads of three little hills instead, and his sword, which a fool had
been able to steal out of its sheath, has of a sudden the likeness of
a rainbow. A wandering lyric moon must knead and kindle perpetually
that moving world of cloaks made out of the fleeces of Mananan; of
armed men who change themselves into sea-birds; of goddesses who
become crows; of trees that bear fruit and flower at the same time.
The great emotions of love, terror, and friendship must alone remain
untroubled by the moon in that world, which is still the world of the
Irish country-people, who do not open their eyes very wide at the most
miraculous change, at the most sudden enchantment. Its events, and
things, and people are wild, and are like unbroken horses, that are
so much more beautiful than horses that have learned to run between
shafts. One thinks of actual life, when one reads those Norse stories,
which had shadows of their decadence, so necessary were the proportions
of actual life to their efforts, when a dying man remembered his
heroism enough to look down at his wound and say, Those broad spears
are coming into fashion; but the Irish stories make us understand
why the Greeks called myths the activities of the dmons. The great
virtues, the great joys, the great privations come in the myths, and,
as it were, take mankind between their naked arms, and without putting
off their divinity. Poets have chosen their themes more often from
stories that are all, or half, mythological, than from history or
stories that give one the sensation of history, understanding, as I
think, that the imagination which remembers the proportions of life is
but a long wooing, and that it has to forget them before it becomes the
torch and the marriage-bed.


V

One finds, as one expects, in the work of men who were not troubled
about any probabilities or necessities but those of emotion itself, an
immense variety of incident and character and of ways of expressing
emotion. Cuchulain fights man after man during the quest of the Brown
Bull, and not one of those fights is like another, and not one is
lacking in emotion or strangeness; and when one thinks imagination can
do no more, the story of the Two Bulls, emblematic of all contests,
suddenly lifts romance into prophecy. The characters too have a
distinctness we do not find among the people of the _Mabinogion_,
perhaps not even among the people of the _Morte DArthur_. We know we
will be long forgetting Cuchulain, whose life is vehement and full
of pleasure, as though he always remembered that it was to be soon
over; or the dreamy Fergus who betrays the sons of Usnach for a feast,
without ceasing to be noble; or Conal who is fierce and friendly and
trustworthy, but has not the sap of divinity that makes Cuchulain
mysterious to men, and beloved of women. Women indeed, with their
lamentations for lovers and husbands and sons, and for fallen rooftrees
and lost wealth, give the stories their most beautiful sentences; and,
after Cuchulain, one thinks most of certain great queensof angry,
amorous Maeve, with her long pale face; of Findabair, her daughter, who
dies of shame and of pity; of Deirdre, who might be some mild modern
housewife but for her prophetic wisdom. If one does not set Deirdres
lamentations among the greatest lyric poems of the world, I think one
may be certain that the wine-press of the poets has been trodden for
one in vain; and yet I think it may be proud Emer, Cuchulains fitting
wife, who will linger longest in the memory. What a pure flame burns
in her always, whether she is the newly-married wife fighting for
precedence, fierce as some beautiful bird, or the confident housewife,
who would awaken her husband from his magic sleep with mocking words;
or the great queen who would get him out of the tightening net of his
doom, by sending him into the Valley of the Deaf, with Niamh, his
mistress, because he will be more obedient to her; or the woman whom
sorrow has set with Helen and Iseult and Brunnhilda, and Deirdre, to
share their immortality in the rosary of the poets.

And oh! my love! she said, we were often in one anothers company,
and it was happy for us; for if the world had been searched from the
rising of the sun to sunset, the like would never have been found in
one place, of the Black Sainglain and the Grey of Macha, and Laeg the
chariot-driver, and myself and Cuchulain.

And after that Emer bade Conal to make a wide, very deep grave for
Cuchulain; and she laid herself down beside her gentle comrade, and she
put her mouth to his mouth, and she said: Love of my life, my friend,
my sweetheart, my one choice of the men of the earth, many is the
woman, wed or unwed, envied me until to-day; and now I will not stay
living after you.


VI

To us Irish these personages should be very moving, very important, for
they lived in the places where we ride and go marketing, and sometimes
they have met one another on the hills that cast their shadows upon our
doors at evening. If we will but tell these stories to our children
the Land will begin again to be a Holy Land, as it was before men
gave their hearts to Greece and Rome and Judea. When I was a child I
had only to climb the hill behind the house to see long, blue, ragged
hills flowing along the southern horizon. What beauty was lost to me,
what depth of emotion is still perhaps lacking in me, because nobody
told me, not even the merchant captains who knew everything, that
Cruachan of the Enchantments lay behind those long, blue, ragged hills!

_March, 1902._




LADY GREGORYS

_GODS AND FIGHTING MEN_


I

A FEW months ago I was on the bare Hill of Allen, wide Almhuin of
Leinster, where Finn and the Fianna are said to have had their house,
although there are no earthen mounds there like those that mark
the sites of old houses on so many hills. A hot sun beat down upon
flowering gorse and flowerless heather; and on every side except the
east, where there were green trees and distant hills, one saw a level
horizon and brown boglands with a few green places and here and there
the glitter of water. One could imagine that had it been twilight and
not early afternoon, and had there been vapours drifting and frothing
where there were now but shadows of clouds, it would have set stirring
in one, as few places even in Ireland can, a thought that is peculiar
to Celtic romance, as I think, a thought of a mystery coming not as
with Gothic nations out of the pressure of darkness, but out of great
spaces and windy light. The hill of Teamhair, or Tara, as it is now
called, with its green mounds and its partly-wooded sides, and its more
gradual slope set among fat grazing lands, with great trees in the
hedgerows, had brought before one imaginations, not of heroes who were
in their youth for hundreds of years, or of women who came to them in
the likeness of hunted fawns, but of kings that lived brief and politic
lives, and of the five white roads that carried their armies to the
lesser kingdoms of Ireland, or brought to the great fair that had given
Teamhair its sovereignty all that sought justice or pleasure or had
goods to barter.


II

It is certain that we must not confuse these kings, as did the
medival chroniclers, with those half-divine kings of Almhuin. The
chroniclers, perhaps because they loved tradition too well to cast
out utterly much that they dreaded as Christians, and perhaps because
popular imagination had begun the mixture, have mixed one with another
ingeniously, making Finn the head of a kind of Militia under Cormac
MacArt, who is supposed to have reigned at Teamhair in the second
century, and making Grania, who travels to enchanted houses under
the cloak of Aengus, god of Love, and keeps her troubling beauty
longer than did Helen hers, Cormacs daughter, and giving the stories
of the Fianna, although the impossible has thrust its proud finger
into them all, a curious air of precise history. It is only when we
separate the stories from that medival pedantry, as in this book,
that we recognise one of the oldest worlds that man has imagined,
an older world certainly than we find in the stories of Cuchulain,
who lived, according to the chroniclers, about the time of the birth
of Christ. They are far better known, and we may be certain of the
antiquity of incidents that are known in one form or another to every
Gaelic-speaking countryman in Ireland or in the Highlands of Scotland.
Sometimes a labourer digging near to a cromlech, or Bed of Diarmuid and
Grania as it is called, will tell one a tradition that seems older and
more barbaric than any description of their adventures or of themselves
in written text or in story that has taken form in the mouths of
professed story-tellers. Finn and the Fianna found welcome among the
court poets later than did Cuchulain; and one finds memories of Danish
invasions and standing armies mixed with the imaginations of hunters
and solitary fighters among great woods. One never hears of Cuchulain
delighting in the hunt or in woodland things; and one imagines that
the story-teller would have thought it unworthy in so great a man,
who lived a well-ordered, elaborate life, and had his chariot and his
chariot-driver and his barley-fed horses to delight in. If he is in
the woods before dawn one is not told that he cannot know the leaves
of the hazel from the leaves of the oak; and when Emer laments him no
wild creature comes into her thoughts but the cuckoo that cries over
cultivated fields. His story must have come out of a time when the wild
wood was giving way to pasture and tillage, and men had no longer a
reason to consider every cry of the birds or change of the night. Finn,
who was always in the woods, whose battles were but hours amid years
of hunting, delighted in the cackling of ducks from the Lake of the
Three Narrows; the scolding talk of the blackbird of Doire an Cairn;
the bellowing of the ox from the Valley of the Berries; the whistle of
the eagle from the Valley of Victories or from the rough branches of
the Ridge of the Stream; the grouse of the heather of Cruachan; the
call of the otter of Druim re Coir. When sorrow comes upon the queens
of the stories, they have sympathy for the wild birds and beasts that
are like themselves: Credhe wife of Cael came with the others and went
looking through the bodies for her comely comrade, and crying as she
went. And as she was searching she saw a crane of the meadows and her
two nestlings, and the cunning beast the fox watching the nestlings;
and when the crane covered one of the birds to save it, he would make a
rush at the other bird, the way she had to stretch herself out over the
birds; and she would sooner have got her own death by the fox than the
nestlings to be killed by him. And Credhe was looking at that, and she
said: It is no wonder I to have such love for my comely sweetheart,
and the bird in that distress about her nestlings.


III

One often hears of a horse that shivers with terror, or of a dog that
howls at something a mans eyes cannot see, and men who live primitive
lives where instinct does the work of reason are fully conscious of
many things that we cannot perceive at all. As life becomes more
orderly, more deliberate, the supernatural world sinks farther away.
Although the gods come to Cuchulain, and although he is the son of
one of the greatest of them, their country and his are far apart, and
they come to him as god to mortal; but Finn is their equal. He is
continually in their houses; he meets with Bodb Dearg, and Aengus, and
Mananan, now as friend with friend, now as with an enemy he overcomes
in battle; and when he has need of their help his messenger can say:
There is not a kings son or a prince, or a leader of the Fianna of
Ireland, without having a wife or a mother or a foster-mother or a
sweetheart of the Tuatha de Danaan. When the Fianna are broken up
at last, after hundreds of years of hunting, it is doubtful that he
dies at all, and certain that he comes again in some other shape, and
Oisin, his son, is made king over a divine country. The birds and
beasts that cross his path in the woods have been fighting-men or great
enchanters or fair women, and in a moment can take some beautiful or
terrible shape. We think of him and of his people as great-bodied men
with large movements, that seem, as it were, flowing out of some deep
below the shallow stream of personal impulse, men that have broad brows
and quiet eyes full of confidence in a good luck that proves every
day afresh that they are a portion of the strength of things. They are
hardly so much individual men as portions of universal nature, like the
clouds that shape themselves and reshape themselves momentarily, or
like a bird between two boughs, or like the gods that have given the
apples and the nuts; and yet this but brings them the nearer to us, for
we can remake them in our image when we will, and the woods are the
more beautiful for the thought. Do we not always fancy hunters to be
something like this, and is not that why we think them poetical when we
meet them of a sudden, as in these lines in _Pauline_?

                              An old hunter
    Talking with gods; or a high-crested chief
    Sailing with troops of friends to Tenedos.


IV

One must not expect in these stories the epic lineaments, the many
incidents, woven into one great event of, let us say, the story of
the War for the Brown Bull of Cuailgne, or that of the last gathering
at Muirthemne. Even _Diarmuid and Grania_, which is a long story,
has nothing of the clear outlines of _Deirdre_, and is indeed but a
succession of detached episodes. The men who imagined the Fianna had
the imagination of children, and as soon as they had invented one
wonder, heaped another on top of it. Childrenor, at any rate, it is so
I remember my own childhooddo not understand large design, and they
delight in little shut-in places where they can play at houses more
than in great expanses where a country-side takes, as it were, the
impression of a thought. The wild creatures and the green things are
more to them than to us, for they creep towards our light by little
holes and crevices. When they imagine a country for themselves, it is
always a country where one can wander without aim, and where one can
never know from one place what another will be like, or know from the
one days adventure what may meet one with to-morrows sun. I have
wished to become a child again that I might find this book, that not
only tells me of such a country, but is fuller than any other book that
tells of heroic life, of the childhood that is in all folk-lore, dearer
to me than all the books of the western world.


V

Children play at being great and wonderful people, at the ambitions
they will put away for one reason or another before they grow into
ordinary men and women. Mankind as a whole had a like dream once;
everybody and nobody built up the dream bit by bit, and the ancient
story-tellers are there to make us remember what mankind would have
been like, had not fear and the failing will and the laws of nature
tripped up its heels. The Fianna and their like are themselves so full
of power, and they are set in a world so fluctuating and dream-like,
that nothing can hold them from being all that the heart desires.

I have read in a fabulous book that Adam had but to imagine a bird and
it was born into life, and that he created all things out of himself
by nothing more important than an unflagging fancy; and heroes who
can make a ship out of a shaving have but little less of the divine
prerogatives. They have no speculative thoughts to wander through
eternity and waste heroic blood; but how could that be otherwise?
for it is at all times the proud angels who sit thinking upon the
hill-side and not the people of Eden. One morning we meet them hunting
a stag that is as joyful as the leaves of a tree in summer-time;
and whatever they do, whether they listen to the harp or follow an
enchanter over-sea, they do for the sake of joy, their joy in one
another, or their joy in pride and movement; and even their battles
are fought more because of their delight in a good fighter than because
of any gain that is in victory. They live always as if they were
playing a game; and so far as they have any deliberate purpose at all,
it is that they may become great gentlemen and be worthy of the songs
of poets. It has been said, and I think the Japanese were the first
to say it, that the four essential virtues are to be generous among
the weak, and truthful among ones friends, and brave among ones
enemies, and courteous at all times; and if we understand by courtesy
not merely the gentleness the story-tellers have celebrated, but a
delight in courtly things, in beautiful clothing and in beautiful
verse, one understands that it was no formal succession of trials
that bound the Fianna to one another. Only the Table Round, that is
indeed, as it seems, a rivulet from the same well-head, is bound in a
like fellowship, and there the four heroic virtues are troubled by the
abstract virtues of the cloister. Every now and then some noble knight
builds himself a cell upon the hill-side, or leaves kind women and
joyful knights to seek the vision of the Grail in lonely adventures.
But when Oisin or some kingly forerunnerBran, son of Febal, or the
likerides or sails in an enchanted ship to some divine country, he
but looks for a more delighted companionship, or to be in love with
faces that will never fade. No thought of any life greater than that of
love, and the companionship of those that have drawn their swords upon
the darkness of the world, ever troubles their delight in one another
as it troubles Iseult amid her love, or Arthur amid his battles. It is
one of the ailments of our speculation that thought, when it is not the
planning of something, or the doing of something or some memory of a
plain circumstance separates us from one another because it makes us
always more unlike, and because no thought passes through anothers
ear unchanged. Companionship can only be perfect when it is founded
on things, for things are always the same under the hand, and at last
one comes to hear with envy the voices of boys lighting a lantern to
ensnare moths, or of the maids chattering in the kitchen about the
fox that carried off a turkey before breakfast. This book is full of
fellowship untroubled like theirs, and made noble by a courtesy that
has gone perhaps out of the world. I do not know in literature better
friends and lovers. When one of the Fianna finds Osgar dying the proud
death of a young man, and asks is it well with him, he is answered, I
am as you would have me be. The very heroism of the Fianna is indeed
but their pride and joy in one another, their good fellowship. Goll,
old and savage, and letting himself die of hunger in a cave because he
is angry and sorry, can speak lovely words to the wife whose help he
refuses. It is best as it is, he said, and I never took the advice
of a woman east or west, and I never will take it. And oh, sweet-voiced
queen, he said, what ails you to be fretting after me? And remember
now your silver and your gold, and your silks ... and do not be crying
tears after me, queen with the white hands, he said, but remember
your constant lover Aodh, son of the best woman of the world, that came
from Spain asking for you, and that I fought on Corcar-an-Dearg; and
go to him now, he said, for it is bad when a woman is without a good
man.


VI

They have no asceticism, but they are more visionary than any ascetic,
and their invisible life is but the life about them made more perfect
and more lasting, and the invisible people are their own images in the
water. Their gods may have been much besides this, for we know them
from fragments of mythology picked out with trouble from a fantastic
history running backward to Adam and Eve, and many things that may have
seemed wicked to the monks who imagined that history, may have been
altered or left out; but this they must have been essentially, for
the old stories are confirmed by apparitions among the country-people
to-day. The Men of Dea fought against the mis-shapen Fomor, as Finn
fights against the Cat-Heads and the Dog-Heads; and when they are
overcome at last by men, they make themselves houses in the hearts of
hills that are like the houses of men. When they call men to their
houses and to their Country Under-Wave they promise them all that they
have upon earth, only in greater abundance. The god Midhir sings to
Queen Etain in one of the most beautiful of the stories: The young
never grow old; the fields and the flowers are as pleasant to be
looking at as the blackbirds eggs; warm streams of mead and wine flow
through that country; there is no care or no sorrow on any person; we
see others, but we ourselves are not seen. These gods are indeed more
wise and beautiful than men; but men, when they are great men, are
stronger than they are, for men are, as it were, the foaming tide-line
of their sea. One remembers the Druid who answered, when some one
asked him who made the world, The Druids made it. All was indeed
but one life flowing everywhere, and taking one quality here, another
there. It sometimes seems to one as if there is a kind of day and night
of religion, and that a period when the influences are those that
shape the world is followed by a period when the greater power is in
influences that would lure the soul out of the world, out of the body.
When Oisin is speaking with St. Patrick of the friends and the life he
has outlived, he can but cry out constantly against a religion that has
no meaning for him. He laments, and the country-people have remembered
his words for centuries: I will cry my fill, but not for God, but
because Finn and the Fianna are not living.


VII

Old writers had an admirable symbolism that attributed certain
energies to the influence of the sun, and certain others to the
lunar influence. To lunar influence belong all thoughts and emotions
that were created by the community, by the common people, by nobody
knows who, and to the sun all that came from the high disciplined or
individual kingly mind. I myself imagine a marriage of the sun and
moon in the arts I take most pleasure in; and now bride and bridegroom
but exchange, as it were, full cups of gold and silver, and now they
are one in a mystical embrace. From the moon come the folk-songs
imagined by reapers and spinners out of the common impulse of their
labour, and made not by putting words together, but by mixing verses
and phrases, and the folk-tales made by the capricious mixing of
incidents known to everybody in new ways, as one deals out cards, never
getting the same hand twice over. When one hears some fine story, one
never knows whether it has not been hazard that put the last touch
of adventure. Such poetry, as it seems to me, desires an infinity
of wonder or emotion, for where there is no individual mind there
is no measurer-out, no marker-in of limits. The poor fisher has no
possession of the world and no responsibility for it; and if he dreams
of a love-gift better than the brown shawl that seems too common for
poetry, why should he not dream of a glove made from the skin of a
bird, or shoes made from the skin of a herring, or a coat made from
the glittering garment of the salmon? Was it not schylus who said he
but served up fragments from the banquet of Homer?but Homer himself
found the great banquet on an earthen floor and under a broken roof.
We do not know who at the foundation of the world made the banquet for
the first time, or who put the pack of cards into rough hands; but we
do know that, unless those that have made many inventions are about
to change the nature of poetry, we may have to go where Homer went if
we are to sing a new song. Is it because all that is under the moon
thirsts to escape out of bounds, to lose itself in some unbounded tidal
stream, that the songs of the folk are mournful, and that the story
of the Fianna, whenever the queens lament for their lovers, reminds
us of songs that are still sung in country-places? Their grief, even
when it is to be brief like Granias, goes up into the waste places of
the sky. But in supreme art or in supreme life there is the influence
of the sun too, and the sun brings with it, as old writers tell us,
not merely discipline but joy; for its discipline is not of the kind
the multitudes impose upon us by their weight and pressure, but the
expression of the individual soul turning itself into a pure fire
and imposing its own pattern, its own music, upon the heaviness and
the dumbness that is in others and in itself. When we have drunk the
cold cup of the moons intoxication, we thirst for something beyond
ourselves, and the mind flows outward to a natural immensity; but if
we have drunk from the hot cup of the sun, our own fulness awakens,
we desire little, for wherever one goes ones heart goes too; and
if any ask what music is the sweetest, we can but answer, as Finn
answered, What happens. And yet the songs and stories that have come
from either influence are a part, neither less than the other, of the
pleasure that is the bride-bed of poetry.


VIII

Gaelic-speaking Ireland, because its art has been made, not by the
artist choosing his material from wherever he has a mind to, but
by adding a little to something which it has taken generations to
invent, has always had a popular literature. We cannot say how much
that literature has done for the vigour of the race, for who can
count the hands its praise of kings and high-hearted queens made hot
upon the sword-hilt, or the amorous eyes it made lustful for strength
and beauty? We remember indeed that when the farming people and the
labourers of the towns made their last attempt to cast out England by
force of arms they named themselves after the companions of Finn.
Even when Gaelic has gone, and the poetry with it, something of the
habit of mind remains in ways of speech and thought and come-all-yes
and poetical saying; nor is it only among the poor that the old
thought has been for strength or weakness. Surely these old stories,
whether of Finn or Cuchulain, helped to sing the old Irish and the old
Norman-Irish aristocracy to their end. They heard their hereditary
poets and story-tellers, and they took to horse and died fighting
against Elizabeth or against Cromwell; and when an English-speaking
aristocracy had their place, it listened to no poetry indeed, but it
felt about it in the popular mind an exacting and ancient tribunal,
and began a play that had for spectators men and women that loved the
high wasteful virtues. I do not think that their own mixed blood or the
habit of their time need take all, or nearly all, credit or discredit
for the impulse that made our gentlemen of the eighteenth century fight
duels over pocket-handkerchiefs, and set out to play ball against the
gates of Jerusalem for a wager, and scatter money before the public
eye; and at last, after an epoch of such eloquence the world has hardly
seen its like, lose their public spirit and their high heart and grow
querulous and selfish as men do who have played life out not heartily
but with noise and tumult. Had they known the people and the game a
little better, they might have created an aristocracy in an age that
has lost the understanding of the word. When one reads of the Fianna,
or of Cuchulain, or of some great hero, one remembers that the fine
life is always a part played finely before fine spectators. There also
one notices the hot cup and the cold cup of intoxication; and when the
fine spectators have ended, surely the fine players grow weary, and
aristocratic life is ended. When OConnell covered with a dark glove
the hand that had killed a man in the duelling-field, he played his
part; and when Alexander stayed his army marching to the conquest of
the world that he might contemplate the beauty of a plane-tree, he
played his part. When Osgar complained as he lay dying of the keening
of the women and the old fighting-men, he too played his part; No man
ever knew any heart in me, he said, but a heart of twisted horn,
and it covered with iron; but the howling of the dogs beside me, he
said, and the keening of the old fighting-men and the crying of the
women one after another, those are the things that are vexing me. If
we would create a great communityand what other game is so worth
the labour?we must recreate the old foundations of life, not as they
existed in that splendid misunderstanding of the eighteenth century,
but as they must always exist when the finest minds and Ned the beggar
and Seaghan the fool think about the same thing, although they may not
think the same thought about it.


IX

When I asked the little boy who had shown me the pathway up the Hill
of Allen if he knew stories of Finn and Oisin, he said he did not, but
that he had often heard his grandfather telling them to his mother in
Irish. He did not know Irish, but he was learning it at school, and all
the little boys he knew were learning it. In a little while he will
know enough stories of Finn and Oisin to tell them to his children some
day. It is the owners of the land whose children might never have known
what would give them so much happiness. But now they can read this book
to those that shall come after them, and it will make Slieve-naman,
Allen, and Benbulben, the great mountain that showed itself before me
every day through all my childhood and was yet unpeopled, and half
the country-sides of south and west, as populous with memories as are
Dundealgan and Emain Macha and Muirthemne; and after a while somebody
may take boy and girl to some famous place and say, This land where
your fathers lived proudly and finely should be dear and dear and again
dear; and perhaps when many names have grown musical to their ears, a
more imaginative love will have taught them a better service.


X

I need say nothing about the translation and arrangement of this book
except that it is worthy to be put beside _Cuchulain of Muirthemne_.
Such books should not be commended by written words but by spoken
words, were that possible, for the written words commending a book,
wherein something is done supremely well, remain, to sound in the ears
of a later generation, like the foolish sound of church bells from the
tower of a church when every pew is full.

_Autumn, 1903._




MR. SYNGE AND HIS PLAYS


SIX years ago I was staying in a students hotel in the Latin quarter,
and somebody, whose name I cannot recollect, introduced me to an
Irishman, who, even poorer than myself, had taken a room at the top
of the house. It was J. M. Synge, and I, who thought I knew the name
of every Irishman who was working at literature, had never heard of
him. He was a graduate of Trinity College, Dublin, too, and Trinity
College does not, as a rule, produce artistic minds. He told me that
he had been living in France and Germany, reading French and German
Literature, and that he wished to become a writer. He had, however,
nothing to show but one or two poems and impressionistic essays, full
of that kind of morbidity that has its root in too much brooding over
methods of expression, and ways of looking upon life, which come, not
out of life, but out of literature, images reflected from mirror to
mirror. He had wandered among people whose life is as picturesque as
the middle ages, playing his fiddle to Italian sailors, and listening
to stories in Bavarian woods, but life had cast no light into his
writings. He had learned Irish years ago, but had begun to forget
it, for the only language that interested him was that conventional
language of modern poetry which has begun to make us all weary. I was
very weary of it for I had finished _The Secret Rose_, and felt how
it had separated my imagination from life, sending my Red Hanrahan,
who should have trodden the same roads with myself, into some
undiscoverable country. I said Give up Paris, you will never create
anything by reading Racine, and Arthur Symons will always be a better
critic of French literature. Go to the Arran Islands. Live there as if
you were one of the people themselves; express a life that has never
found expression. I had just come from Arran, and my imagination was
full of those gray islands where men must reap with knives because of
the stones.

He went to Arran and became a part of its life, living upon salt fish
and eggs, talking Irish for the most part, but listening also to the
beautiful English which has grown up in Irish-speaking districts, and
takes its vocabulary from the time of Malory and of the translators
of the Bible, but its idiom and its vivid metaphor from Irish. When
Mr. Synge began to write in this language, Lady Gregory had already
used it finely in her translations of Dr. Hydes lyrics and plays, or
of old Irish literature, but she had listened with different ears. He
made his own selection of word and phrase, choosing what would express
his own personality. Above all, he made word and phrase dance to a
very strange rhythm, which will always, till his plays have created
their own tradition, be difficult to actors who have not learned it
from his lips. It is essential, for it perfectly fits the drifting
emotion, the dreaminess, the vague yet measureless desire, for which
he would create a dramatic form. It blurs definition, clear edges,
everything that comes from the will, it turns imagination from all
that is of the present, like a gold background in a religious picture,
and it strengthens in every emotion whatever comes to it from far off,
from brooding memory and dangerous hope. When he brought _The Shadow
of the Glen_, his first play, to the Irish National Theatre Society,
the players were puzzled by the rhythm, but gradually they became
certain that his woman of the glens, as melancholy as a curlew, driven
to distraction by her own sensitiveness, her own fineness, could not
speak with any other tongue, that all his people would change their
life if the rhythm changed. Perhaps no Irish countryman had ever that
exact rhythm in his voice, but certainly if Mr. Synge had been born a
countryman, he would have spoken like that. It makes the people of his
imagination a little disembodied; it gives them a kind of innocence
even in their anger and their cursing. It is part of its makers
attitude towards the world, for while it makes the clash of wills among
his persons indirect and dreamy, it helps him to see the subject-matter
of his art with wise, clear-seeing, unreflecting eyes; to preserve the
innocence of good art in an age of reasons and purposes. Whether he
write of old beggars by the roadside, lamenting over the misery and
ugliness of life, or of an old Arran woman mourning her drowned sons,
or of a young wife married to an old husband, he has no wish to change
anything, to reform anything; all these people pass by as before an
open window, murmuring strange, exciting words.

If one has not fine construction, one has not drama, but if one has not
beautiful or powerful and individual speech, one has not literature,
or, at any rate, one has not great literature. Rabelais, Villon,
Shakespeare, William Blake, would have known one another by their
speech. Some of them knew how to construct a story, but all of them had
abundant, resonant, beautiful, laughing, living speech. It is only the
writers of our modern dramatic movement, our scientific dramatists,
our naturalists of the stage, who have thought it possible to be like
the greatest, and yet to cast aside even the poor persiflage of the
comedians, and to write in the impersonal language that has come, not
out of individual life, nor out of life at all, but out of necessities
of commerce, of parliament, of board schools, of hurried journeys by
rail.

If there are such things as decaying art and decaying institutions,
their decay must begin when the element they receive into their care
from the life of every man in the world, begins to rot. Literature
decays when it no longer makes more beautiful, or more vivid, the
language which unites it to all life; and when one finds the criticism
of the student, and the purpose of the reformer, and the logic of the
man of science, where there should have been the reveries of the common
heart, ennobled into some raving Lear or unabashed Don Quixote. One
must not forget that the death of language, the substitution of phrases
as nearly impersonal as algebra for words and rhythms varying from man
to man, is but a part of the tyranny of impersonal things. I have been
reading through a bundle of German plays, and have found everywhere a
desire not to express hopes and alarms common to every man that ever
came into the world, but politics or social passion, a veiled or open
propaganda. Now it is duelling that has need of reproof; now it is the
ideas of an actress, returning from the free life of the stage, that
must be contrasted with the prejudice of an old-fashioned town; now it
is the hostility of Christianity and Paganism in our own day that is
to find an obscure symbol in a bell thrown from its tower by spirits
of the wood. I compare the work of these dramatists with the greater
plays of their Scandinavian master, and remember that even he, who has
made so many clear-drawn characters, has made us no abundant character,
no man of genius in whom we could believe, and that in him also, even
when it is Emperor and Galilean that are face to face, even the most
momentous figures are subordinate to some tendency, to some movement,
to some inanimate energy, or to some process of thought whose very
logic has changed it into mechanismalways to something other than
human life.

We must not measure a young talent, whether we praise or blame, with
that of men who are among the greatest of our time, but we may say
of any talent, following out a definition, that it takes up the
tradition of great drama as it came from the hands of the masters who
are acknowledged by all time, and turns away from a dramatic movement,
which, though it has been served by fine talent, has been imposed upon
us by science, by artificial life, by a passing order.

When the individual life no longer delights in its own energy, when the
body is not made strong and beautiful by the activities of daily life,
when men have no delight in decorating the body, one may be certain
that one lives in a passing order, amid the inventions of a fading
vitality. If Homer were alive to-day, he would only resist, after a
deliberate struggle, the temptation to find his subject not in Helens
beauty, that every man has desired, nor in the wisdom and endurance of
Odysseus that has been the desire of every woman that has come into the
world, but in what somebody would describe, perhaps, as the inevitable
contest, arising out of economic causes, between the country-places
and small towns on the one hand, and, upon the other, the great city of
Troy, representing one knows not what tendency to centralization.

Mr. Synge has in common with the great theatre of the world, with
that of Greece and that of India, with the creator of Falstaff, with
Racine, a delight in language, a preoccupation with individual life. He
resembles them also by a preoccupation with what is lasting and noble,
that came to him, not as I think from books, but while he listened
to old stories in the cottages, and contrasted what they remembered
with reality. The only literature of the Irish country-people is their
songs, full often of extravagant love, and their stories of kings
and of kings children. I will cry my fill, but not for God, but
because Finn and the Fianna are not living, says Oisin in the story.
Every writer, even every small writer, who has belonged to the great
tradition, has had his dream of an impossibly noble life, and the
greater he is, the more does it seem to plunge him into some beautiful
or bitter reverie. Some, and of these are all the earliest poets of
the world, gave it direct expression; others mingle it so subtly with
reality, that it is a days work to disentangle it; others bring it
near by showing one whatever is most its contrary. Mr. Synge, indeed,
sets before us ugly, deformed or sinful people, but his people, moved
by no practical ambition, are driven by a dream of that impossible
life. That we may feel how intensely his woman of the glen dreams
of days that shall be entirely alive, she that is a hard woman to
please, must spend her days between a sour-faced old husband, a man
who goes mad upon the hills, a craven lad and a drunken tramp; and
those two blind people of _The Well of the Saints_ are so transformed
by the dream, that they choose blindness rather than reality. He tells
us of realities, but he knows that art has never taken more than its
symbols from anything that the eye can see or the hand measure.

It is the preoccupation of his characters with their dream that gives
his plays their drifting movement, their emotional subtlety. In most
of the dramatic writing of our time, and this is one of the reasons
why our dramatists do not find the need for a better speech, one finds
a simple motive lifted, as it were, into the full light of the stage.
The ordinary student of drama will not find anywhere in _The Well of
the Saints_ that excitement of the will in the presence of attainable
advantages, which he is accustomed to think the natural stuff of drama,
and if he see it played he will wonder why act is knitted to act so
loosely, why it is all, as it were, flat, why there is so much leisure
in the dialogue, even in the midst of passion. If he see the _Shadow of
the Glen_, he will ask, why does this woman go out of her house? Is it
because she cannot help herself, or is she content to go? Why is it not
all made clearer? And yet, like everybody when caught up into great
events, she does many things without being quite certain why she does
them. She hardly understands at moments why her action has a certain
form, more clearly than why her body is tall or short, fair or brown.
She feels an emotion that she does not understand. She is driven by
desires that need for their expression, not I admire this man, or I
must go, whether I will or no, but words full of suggestion, rhythms
of voice, movements that escape analysis. In addition to all this, she
has something that she shares with none but the children of one mans
imagination. She is intoxicated by a dream which is hardly understood
by herself, but possesses her like something half-remembered on a
sudden wakening.

While I write, we are rehearsing _The Well of the Saints_, and are
painting for it decorative scenery, mountains in one or two flat
colours and without detail, ash trees and red salleys with something of
recurring pattern in their woven boughs. For though the people of the
play use no phrase they could not use in daily life, we know that we
are seeking to express what no eye has ever seen.

    ABBEY THEATRE,
      _January 27, 1905_.




LIONEL JOHNSON


CONTEMPORARY Irish poets believe in a spiritual life, invisible and
troubling, and express this belief in their poetry. Contemporary
English poets are interested in the glory of the world, like Mr.
Rudyard Kipling; or in the order of the world, like Mr. William Watson;
or in the passion of the world, like Mr. John Davidson; or in the
pleasure of the world, like Mr. Arthur Symons. Mr. Francis Thompson,
who has fallen under the shadow of Mr. Coventry Patmore, the poet of
an older time and in protest against that time, is alone preoccupied
with a spiritual life; and even he, except at rare moments, has less
living fervour of belief than pleasure in the gleaming and scented and
coloured symbols that are the footsteps where the belief of others has
trodden. Ireland, upon the other hand, is creating in English a poetry
as full of spiritual ardour as the poetry that praised in Gaelic _The
Country of the Two Mists_, and _The Country of the Young_, and _The
Country of the Living Heart_.

A.E. has written an ecstatic pantheistic poetry which reveals in all
things a kind of scented flame consuming them from within. Miss Hopper,
an unequal writer, whose best verses are delicate and distinguished,
has no clear vision of spiritual things, but makes material things
as frail and fragile as if they were but smouldering leaves, that we
stirred in some mid-world of dreams, as the gossips in her poem stir
their lives red ashes. Mrs. Hinkson, uninteresting at her worst,
as only uncritical and unspeculative writers are uninteresting, has
sometimes expressed an impassioned and instinctive Catholicism in poems
that are, as I believe, as perfect as they are beautiful, while Mr.
Lionel Johnson has in his poetry completed the trinity of the spiritual
virtues by adding Stoicism to Ecstasy and Asceticism. He has renounced
the world and built up a twilight world instead, where all the colours
are like the colours in the rainbow that is cast by the moon, and
all the people as far from modern tumults as the people upon fading
and dropping tapestries. He has so little interest in our pains and
pleasures, and is so wrapped up in his own world, that one comes from
his books wearied and exalted, as though one had posed for some noble
action in a strange _tableau vivant_ that cast its painful stillness
upon the mind instead of the body. He might have cried with Axel, As
for living, our servants will do that for us. As Axel chose to die,
he has chosen to live among his books and between two memoriesthe
religious tradition of the Church of Rome and the political tradition
of Ireland. From these he gazes upon the future, and whether he write
of Sertorius or of Lucretius, or of Parnell or of Irelands dead, or
of 98, or of St. Columba or of Leo XIII., it is always with the same
cold or scornful ecstasy. He has made a world full of altar lights and
golden vestures, and murmured Latin and incense clouds, and autumn
winds and dead leaves, where one wanders remembering martyrdoms and
courtesies that the world has forgotten.

His ecstasy is the ecstasy of combat, not of submission to the Divine
will; and even when he remembers that the old Saints prevail, he sees
the one ancient Priest who alone offers the Sacrifice, and remembers
the loneliness of the Saints. Had he not this ecstasy of combat, he
would be the poet of those peaceful and unhappy souls, who, in the
symbolism of a living Irish visionary, are compelled to inhabit when
they die a shadowy island Paradise in the West, where the moon always
shines, and a mist is always on the face of the moon, and a music of
many sighs is always in the air, because they renounced the joy of the
world without accepting the joy of God.

1899.




THE PATHWAY


MOST of us who are writing books in Ireland to-day have some kind of
a spiritual philosophy; and some among us when we look backward upon
our lives see that the coming of a young Brahmin into Ireland helped
to give our vague thoughts a shape. When we were schoolboys we used to
discuss whatever we could find to read of mystical philosophy and to
pass crystals over each others hands and eyes and to fancy that we
could feel a breath flowing from them as people did in a certain German
book; and one day somebody told us he had met a Brahmin in London who
knew more of these things than any book. With a courage which I still
admire, we wrote and asked him to come and teach us, and he came with
a little bag in his hand and _Marius the Epicurean_ in his pocket, and
stayed with one of us, who gave him a plate of rice and an apple every
day at two oclock; and for a week and all day long he unfolded what
seemed to be all wisdom. He sat there beautiful, as only an Eastern is
beautiful, making little gestures with his delicate hands, and to him
alone among all the talkers I have heard, the delight of ordered words
seemed nothing, and all thought a flight into the heart of truth.

We brought him, on the evening of his coming, to a certain club which
still discusses everything with that leisure which is the compensation
of unsuccessful countries; and there he overthrew or awed into silence
whatever metaphysics the town had. And next day, when we would have
complimented him, he was remorseful and melancholy, for was it not
intellectual lust? And sometimes he would go back over something he
had said and explain to us that his argument had been a fallacy, and
apologise as though he had offended against good manners. And once,
when we questioned him of some event, he told us what he seemed to
remember, but asked us not to give much weight to his memory, for he
had found that he observed carelessly. He said, We Easterns are taught
to state a principle carefully, but we are not taught to observe and to
remember and to describe a fact. Our sense of what truthfulness is is
quite different from yours. His principles were a part of his being,
while our facts, though he was too polite to say it, were doubtless
a part of that bodily life, which is, as he believed, an error. He
certainly did hold that we lived too much to understand the truth or
to live long, for he remembered that his father, who had been the first
of his family for two thousand years to leave his native village, had
repeated over and over upon his deathbed, The West is dying because of
its restlessness. Once when he had spoken of some Englishman who had
gone down the crater of Vesuvius, some listener adventured: We like
men who do that kind of thing, because a man should not think too much
of his life, but was answered solidly, You do not think little of
your lives, but you think so much of your lives that you would enjoy
them everywhere, even in the crater of Vesuvius. Somebody asked him
if we should pray, but even prayer was too full of hope, of desire, of
life, to have any part in that acquiescence that was his beginning of
wisdom, and he answered that one should say, before sleeping: I have
lived many lives. I have been a slave and a prince. Many a beloved has
sat upon my knees, and I have sat upon the knees of many a beloved.
Everything that has been shall be again. Beautiful words, that I
spoilt once by turning them into clumsy verse.

Nearly all that we call education was to him but a means to bring us
under the despotism of life; and I remember the bewilderment of a
schoolmaster who asked about the education of children and was told
to teach them fairy tales, and that they did not possess even their
own bodies. I think he would not have taught anybody anything that had
to be written in prose, for he said, very seriously, I have thought
much about it, and I have never been able to discover any reason why
prose should exist. I think he would not have trained anybody in
anything but in the arts and in philosophy, which sweeps the pathway
before them, for he certainly thought, as William Blake did, that the
imagination is the man himself, and can, if it be strong enough,
work every miracle. A man had come to him in London, and had said, My
wife believes that you have the wisdom of the East and can cure her
neuralgia, from which she has suffered for years. He had answered:
Are you certain that she believes that? because, if you are, I can
cure her. He had gone to her and made a circle round her and recited
a poem in Sanscrit, and she had never had neuralgia since. He recited
the poem to us, and was very disappointed because we did not know by
the sound that it was a description of the spring. Not only did he
think that the imaginative arts were the only things that were quite
sinless, but he spent more than half a day proving, by many subtle and
elaborate arguments, that art for arts sake was the only sinless
doctrine, for any other would hide the shadow of the world as it
exists in the mind of God by shadows of the accidents and illusions of
life, and was but Sadducean blasphemy. Religion existed also for its
own sake; and every soul quivered between two emotions, the desire to
possess things, to make them a portion of its egotism, and a delight
in just and beautiful things for their own sakeand all religions were
a doctrinal or symbolical crying aloud of this delight. He would not
give his own belief a name for fear he might seem to admit that there
could be religion that expressed another delight, and if one urged him
too impetuously, he would look embarrassed and say, This body is a
Brahmin. All other parts of religion were unimportant, for even our
desire of immortality was no better than our other desires. Before
I understood him, I asked what he would answer to one who began the
discussion by denying the immortality of the soul, for the accident
of a discussion with religious people had set him grafting upon this
stock, and he said, I would say to him, What has that to do with you?

I remember these phrases and these little fragments of argument quite
clearly, for their charm and their unexpectedness has made them cling
to the memory; but when I try to remember his philosophy as a whole, I
cannot part it from what I myself have built about it, or have gathered
in the great ruined house of the prophetic books of William Blake;
but I am certain that he taught us by what seemed an invincible logic
that those who die, in so far as they have imagined beauty or justice,
are made a part of beauty or justice, and move through the minds of
living men, as Shelley believed; and that mind overshadows mind even
among the living, and by pathways that lie beyond the senses; and that
he measured labour by this measure, and put the hermit above all other
labourers, because, being the most silent and the most hidden, he lived
nearer to the Eternal Powers, and showed their mastery of the world.
Alcibiades fled from Socrates lest he might do nothing but listen to
him all life long, and I am certain that we, seeking as youth will for
some unknown deed and thought, all dreamed that but to listen to this
man who threw the enchantment of power about silent and gentle things,
and at last to think as he did, was the one thing worth doing and
thinking; and that all action and all words that lead to action were a
little vulgar, a little trivial. Ah, how many years it has taken me to
awake out of that dream!

1900-1908.




A BIBLIOGRAPHY OF

THE WRITINGS

OF

WILLIAM BUTLER YEATS

BY

ALLAN WADE.


_NOTE._

_I began to make this bibliography a good many years ago, putting
into an old note-book a list of all the writings of Mr. Yeats that I
knew, and adding others from time to time, as chance led me to find
them in newspapers or periodicals. I had no thought in doing this but
my own pleasure, and it is with a kind of wonder that I see my notes
taking the form of a book or part of a book at Mr. Bullens beautiful
Shakespeare Head Press._

_I do not think the arrangement of the bibliography needs any
explanation. I have not found it possible always to identify the
first appearance of poems and essays, particularly in the earlier
collections; nor have I thought it necessary to include a reference to
every letter written by Mr. Yeats to the Press, since many of these
have dealt merely with small points of fact in this or that controversy
of the moment. But otherwise I have tried to make the work as complete
as possible, and have given many details to serve as guides to those
who would study the path along which beauty has come into the world. I
have watched the roses blossoming in the garden, though I may not know
the secret of their growth._

_My thanks for help and suggestions are due to Mr. Yeats himself and to
Mr. A. H. Bullen, Mrs. Tynan Hinkson, Miss A. E. F. Horniman, Mr. John
Masefield and Mr. T. W. Rolleston. The details of the American editions
of Mr. Yeatss books have been kindly supplied by Mr. John Quinn of New
York._

                                                      _ALLAN WADE._

_June, 1908._


   _Accursed who brings to light of day
    The writings I have cast away!
    But blessed he that stirs them not
    And lets the kind worm take the lot!_
                                  W.B.Y.




PART I.ORIGINAL WORKS.




1886.


Mosada. | A Dramatic Poem. | By | W. B. Yeats. | With a | Frontispiece
Portrait of the Author | By J. B. Yeats. | Reprinted from the Dublin
University Review. | Dublin: | Printed by Sealy, Bryers, and Walker, |
94, 95 and 96 Middle Abbey Street. | 1886.

The whole enclosed in decorated border.

8vo, pp. ii and 12. Light brown paper covers.

There is no title-page, the above description being taken from the
front cover.

_Mosada_ originally appeared in _The Dublin University Review_, June,
1886.




1889.


The Wanderings of Oisin | and other Poems | by | W. B. Yeats | London |
Kegan Paul, Trench & Co., 1, Paternoster Square | 1889

    Fcap. 8vo, pp. vi and 156. Cloth.


CONTENTS.

    _The Wanderings of Oisin._

    _Time and the Witch Vivien._

    _The Stolen Child._ Originally appeared in _The Irish
      Monthly_, December, 1886.

    _Girls Song._

    _Ephemera. An Autumn Idyll._

    _An Indian Song._ Originally appeared in _The Dublin
      University Review_, December, 1886.

    _Kanva, the Indian, on God._ Originally appeared,
      under the title _From the Book of Kauri the Indian_.
      Section V., _On the Nature of God_, in _The Dublin
      University Review_, October, 1886.

    _Kanva on Himself._

    _Jealousy._

    _Song of the Last Arcadian._ Originally appeared, under
      the title _An Epilogue. To The Island of Statues_
      and _The Seeker_, in _The Dublin University
      Review_, October, 1885.

    _King Goll._ (_Third Century._) Originally appeared,
      under the title _King Goll_. _An Irish Legend_, in
      _The Leisure Hour_, September, 1887.

    _The Meditation of the Old Fisherman._ Originally
      appeared in _The Irish Monthly_, October, 1886.

    _The Ballad of Moll Magee._

    _The Phantom Ship._

    _A Lovers Quarrel among the Fairies._

    _Mosada._ Originally appeared in _The Dublin University
      Review_, June, 1886.

    _How Ferencz Renyi kept Silent._ Originally appeared in
      _The Boston Pilot_.

    _The Fairy Doctor._ Originally appeared in _The Irish
      Fireside_, September 10, 1887.

    _Falling of the Leaves._

    _Miserrimus._ Originally appeared in _The Dublin
      University Review_, October, 1886.

    _The Priest and the Fairy._

    _The Fairy Pedant._ Originally appeared in _The Irish
      Monthly_, March, 1887.

    _She who dwelt among the Sycamores. A Fancy._
      Originally appeared in _The Irish Monthly_,
      September, 1887.

    _On Mr. Nettleships Picture at the Royal Hibernian
      Academy_, 1885. Originally appeared in _The Dublin
      University Review_, April, 1886.

    _A Legend._

    _An Old Song re-sung._

    _Street Dancers._ This poem appeared in _The Leisure
      Hour_, March, 1890.

    _To an Isle in the Water._

    _Quatrains and Aphorisms._ The first quatrain
      originally appeared in _The Dublin University
      Review_, February, 1886, under the title _Life_, and
      the second and sixth in January, 1886, under the
      title _In a Drawing Room_.

    _The Seeker._ Originally appeared, under the title _The
      Seeker. A Dramatic Poem. In Two Scenes_, in _The
      Dublin University Review_, September, 1885.

    _Island of Statues._ Originally appeared, under the
      title _The Island of Statues. An Arcadian Faery Tale.
      In Two Acts_, in _The Dublin University Review_,
      April, May, June and July, 1885.




1891.


Ganconagh | John Sherman | and | Dhoya | London | T. Fisher Unwin |
Paternoster Square | M DCCC XCI

24mo, pp. iv and 196. _The Pseudonym Library_, issued in yellow paper
and in light brown linen. No. 10.


CONTENTS.

    _Ganconaghs Apology._

    _John Sherman._

    _Dhoya._




1892.


The | Countess Kathleen | and various Legends and Lyrics. | By | W. B.
Yeats. | He who tastes a crust of bread | tastes all the stars and all
| the heavens. | Paracelsus ab Hohenheim | Cameo Series | T. Fisher
Unwin Paternoster Sq. | London E.C. MDCCCXCII.

12mo, pp. 144. Paper boards with vellum back. Published in the Cameo
Series. Frontispiece by J. T. Nettleship.


CONTENTS.

    _Preface._

    _The Countess Cathleen._

    _To the Rose upon the Rood of Time._

    _Fergus and the Druid._ Originally appeared in _The
      National Observer_, May 21, 1891.

    _The Rose of the World._ Originally appeared, under
      the title _Rosa Mundi_, in _The National Observer_,
      January 2, 1892.

    _The Peace of the Rose._ Originally appeared in _The
      National Observer_, February 13, 1892.

    _The Death of Cuchullin._ Originally appeared in
      _United Ireland_, June 11, 1892.

    _The White Birds._ Originally appeared in _The National
      Observer_, May 7, 1892.

    _Father Gilligan._ Originally appeared, under the title
      _Father Gilligan_. (_A Legend told by the People of
      Castleisland, Kerry._), in _The Scots Observer_, July
      5, 1890.

    _Father OHart._ Appeared, under the title _The Priest
      of Coloony_ in _Fairy and Folk Tales of the Irish
      Peasantry_, 1888.

    _When You are Old._

    _The Sorrow of Love._

    _The Ballad of the Old Foxhunter._ Originally appeared
      in _East and West_, November, 1889.

    _A Fairy Song._ Originally appeared in _The National
      Observer_, September 12, 1891.

    _The Pity of Love._

    _The Lake Isle of Innisfree._ Originally appeared in
      _The National Observer_, December 13, 1890.

    _A Cradle Song._ Originally appeared in _The Scots
      Observer_, April 19, 1890.

    _The Man who Dreamed of Fairy Land._ Originally
      appeared, under the title _A Man who dreamed of
      Fairyland_, in _The National Observer_, February 7,
      1891.

    _Dedication of Irish Tales._ Originally appeared in
      _Representative Irish Tales_, 1890.

    _The Lamentation of the Old Pensioner._ Originally
      appeared in _The Scots Observer_, November 15, 1890.

    _When You are Sad._

    _The Two Trees._

    _They went forth to the Battle, but they always Fell._

    _An Epitaph._ Originally appeared in _The National
      Observer_, December 12, 1891.

    _Apologia Addressed to Ireland in the Coming Days._

    _Notes._




1893.


The Celtic Twilight. [in red] | Men and Women, Dhouls and | Faeries. |
By | W. B. Yeats. | With a frontispiece by J. B. Yeats. | (Press mark
of Lawrence and Bullen) | London: | Lawrence and Bullen, [in red] | 16,
Henrietta St., Covent Garden. | 1893.

    18mo, pp. xii and 212. Cloth.


CONTENTS.

    Poem: _Time drops in decay_. Originally appeared, under
      the title _The Moods_, in _The Bookman_, Aug., 1893.

    _The Host._ Originally appeared under the title _The
      Faery Host_, in _The National Observer_, October 7,
      1893.

    _This Book._

    _A Teller of Tales._ A part of this essay originally
      appeared in the introduction to _Fairy and Folk Tales
      of the Irish Peasantry_, 1888.

    _Belief and Unbelief._ A part of this essay originally
      appeared in an essay _Irish Fairies_ in _The Leisure
      Hour_, October, 1890.

    _A Visionary._ Originally appeared, under the title _An
      Irish Visionary_, in _The National Observer_, October
      3, 1891.

    _Village Ghosts._ Originally appeared in _The Scots
      Observer_, May 11, 1889.

    _A Knight of the Sheep._ Originally appeared, under the
      title _An Impression_, in _The Speaker_, October 21,
      1893.

    _The Sorcerers._

    _The Last Gleeman._ Originally appeared in _The
      National Observer_, May 6, 1893.

    _Regina, Regina Pigmeorum, Veni._

    _Kidnappers._ Originally appeared in _The Scots
      Observer_, June 15, 1889.

    _The Untiring Ones._

    _The Man and his Boots._

    _A Coward._

    _The Three OByrnes and the Evil Faeries._ Originally
      appeared as part of an essay _Irish Fairies_ in _The
      Leisure Hour_, October, 1890.

    _Drumcliff and Rosses._ Originally appeared, under
      the title _Columkille and Rosses_, in _The Scots
      Observer_, October 5, 1889.

    _The Thick Skull of the Fortunate._

    _The Religion of a Sailor._

    _Concerning the Nearness Together of Heaven, Earth and
      Purgatory._

    _The Eaters of Precious Stones._

    _Our Lady of the Hills._ Originally appeared in _The
      Speaker_, November 11, 1893.

    _The Golden Age._

    _A Remonstrance with Scotsmen for having soured the
      disposition of their Ghosts and Faeries._ Originally
      appeared under the title _Scots and Irish Fairies_ in
      _The Scots Observer_, March 2, 1889.

    _The Four Winds of Desire._

    _Into the Twilight._ Originally appeared, under
      the title _The Celtic Twilight_ in _The National
      Observer_, July 29, 1893.




1894.


The Land | of Hearts | Desire | by | W. B. Yeats. | London: T. Fisher
| Unwin, Paternoster | Square. MDCCCXCIV

    The left-hand side of the title-page bears Aubrey
      Beardsleys design for the Avenue Theatre poster,
      much reduced in size and printed in black.

    Sm. 4to, pp. 48. Pink paper cover, bearing reprint of
      the title-page.




1895.


Poems | By W. B. Yeats | London: Published by T. Fisher Unwin. | No.
XI: Paternoster Buildings: MDCCCXCV [The whole forms part of a design
by H.G.F.]

    Cr. 8vo, pp. xii and 288. Cloth.


CONTENTS.

    _Preface._ (Dated Sligo, March 24, 1895.)

    _To Some I have talked with by the fire._ Originally
      appeared in _The Bookman_, May, 1895.

    _The Wanderings of Usheen._[F]

    _The Countess Cathleen._[G]

    _The Land of Hearts Desire._

    _The Rose_:

      _To the Rose upon the Rood of Time._[G]

      _Fergus and the Druid._[G]

      _The Death of Cuhoolin._[G]

      _The Rose of the World._[G]

      _The Rose of Peace._[G]

      _The Rose of Battle._[G]

      _A Faery Song._[G]

      _The Lake Isle of Innisfree._[G]

      _A Cradle Song._[G]

      _The Pity of Love._[G]

      _The Sorrow of Love._[G]

      _When You are Old._[G]

      _The White Birds._[G]

      _A Dream of Death._[G]

      _A Dream of a Blessed Spirit._ Originally appeared,
        under the title _Kathleen_, in _The National
        Observer_, October 31, 1891.

      _The Man who Dreamed of Faeryland._[G]

      _The Dedication to a Book of Stories selected from
        the Irish Novelists._[G]

      _The Lamentation of the Old Pensioner._[G]

      _The Ballad of Father Gilligan._[G]

      _The Two Trees._[G]

      _To Ireland in the Coming Times._[G]

_Crossways_:

      _The Song of the Happy Shepherd._[F]

      _The Sad Shepherd._[F]

      _The Cloak, the Boat, and the Shoes._[F] (A
        re-writing of the first lines of _Island of
        Statues_.)

      _Anashuya and Vijaya._[F]

      _The Indian upon God._[F]

      _The Indian to his Love._[F]

      _The Falling of the Leaves._[F]

      _Ephemera._[F]

      _The Madness of King Goll._[F]

      _The Stolen Child._[F]

      _To an Isle in the Water._[F]

      _Down by the Salley Gardens._[F]

      _The Meditation of the Old Fisherman._[F]

      _The Ballad of Father OHart._[G]

      _The Ballad of Moll Magee._[F]

      _The Ballad of the Foxhunter._[G]

_Glossary._


1899. Second Edition, revised.

This edition has a portrait of the author by J. B. Yeats facing
title-page, the preface is re-written, and the contents re-arranged
thus:


      _Preface._ (Dated February 24, 1899.)

      _To Some I have talked with by the fire._

      _The Countess Cathleen._

      _The Rose._

      _The Land of Hearts Desire._

      _Crossways._

      _The Wanderings of Oisin._

      _Glossary._



1901. Third Edition, revised.

This edition has a new preface, dated January, 1901, and the note in
the glossary on _The Countess Cathleen_ is much enlarged.




1897.


The Secret Rose: [in red] | By W. B. Yeats, with | Illustrations by J.
B. | Yeats. | (Press mark of Lawrence and Bullen) | Lawrence & Bullen,
Limited, [in red] | 16 Henrietta Street, Covent Garden, | London,
MDCCCXCVII.

    Cr. 8vo, pp. xii and 268. Cloth.


CONTENTS.

    _Dedication to A.E._

    _To the Secret Rose._ Originally appeared, under the
      title _OSullivan Rua to the Secret Rose_, in _The
      Savoy_, September, 1896.

    _The Binding of the Hair._ Originally appeared in _The
      Savoy_, January, 1896.

    _The Wisdom of the King._ Originally appeared, under
      the title _Wisdom_, in _The New Review_, Sept., 1895.

    _Where there is Nothing, there is God._ Originally
      appeared in _The Sketch_, October 21, 1896.

    _The Crucifixion of the Outcast._ Originally appeared,
      under the title _A Crucifixion_, in _The National
      Observer_, March 24, 1894.

    _Out of the Rose._ Originally appeared in _The National
      Observer_, May 27, 1893.

    _The Curse of the Fires and of the Shadows._ Originally
      appeared in _The National Observer_, Aug. 5, 1893.

    _The Heart of the Spring._ Originally appeared in _The
      National Observer_, April 15, 1893.

    _Of Costello the Proud, of Oona the Daughter of Dermott
      and of the Bitter Tongue._ Originally appeared, under
      the title _Costello the Proud, Oona MacDermott and
      the Bitter Tongue_, in _The Pageant_, 1896.

    _The Book of the Great Dhoul and Hanrahan the Red._
      Originally appeared, under the title _The Devils
      Book_, in _The National Observer_, November 26, 1892.

    _The Twisting of the Rope and Hanrahan the Red._
      Originally appeared, under the title _The Twisting of
      the Rope_, in _The National Observer_, December 24,
      1892.

    _Kathleen the Daughter of Hoolihan and Hanrahan
      the Red._ Originally appeared, under the title
      _Kathleen-ny-Houlihan_, in _The National Observer_,
      Aug. 4, 1894.

    _The Curse of Hanrahan the Red._ Originally appeared,
      under the title _The Curse of OSullivan the Red upon
      Old Age_, in _The National Observer_, September 29,
      1894.

    _The Vision of Hanrahan the Red._ Originally appeared,
      under the title _The Vision of OSullivan the Red_,
      in _The New Review_, April, 1896.

    _The Death of Hanrahan the Red._ Originally appeared,
      under the title _The Death of OSullivan the Red_, in
      _The New Review_, December, 1896.

    _The Rose of Shadow._ Originally appeared under
      the title _Those Who Live in the Storm_, in _The
      Speaker_, July 21, 1894.

    _The Old Men of the Twilight._ Originally appeared,
      under the title _St. Patrick and the Pedants_, in
      _The Weekly Sun Literary Supplement_, December 1,
      1895.

    _Rosa Alchemica._ Originally appeared in _The Savoy_,
      April, 1896.

The Tables of the Law. | The Adoration of the Magi. | By W. B. Yeats. |
(Press mark of Lawrence and Bullen) | Privately Printed | MDCCCXCVII.

Cr. 8vo, pp. 48. Cloth. Portrait by J. B. Yeats facing title-page.


CONTENTS.

    _The Tables of the Law._ Originally appeared in _The
      Savoy_, November, 1896.

    _The Adoration of the Magi._

One hundred and ten copies printed.


1904. First published edition:

The Tables of the Law | and | The Adoration of the Magi | by | W. B.
Yeats | London | Elkin Mathews, Vigo Street | 1904

Royal 16mo, pp. 60 and iv of advertisements. Paper covers. No. 17 of
_The Vigo Cabinet Series_.


CONTENTS.

    _Prefatory Note._

    _The Tables of the Law._

    _The Adoration of the Magi._

Also an Edition de Luxe, limited.




1899.


The Wind | Among the Reeds | By | W. B. Yeats | London: Elkin Mathews |
Vigo Street, W., 1899.

    Cr. 8vo, pp. viii and 108. Cloth.


CONTENTS.

    _The Hosting of the Sidhe._ For original appearance see
      under title _The Host_, in _The Celtic Twilight_,
      1893.

    _The Everlasting Voices._ Originally appeared, under
      the title _Everlasting Voices_, in _The New Review_,
      January, 1896.

    _The Moods._ For original appearance see _The Celtic
      Twilight_, 1893.

    _Aedh tells of the Rose in his Heart._ Originally
      appeared, under the title _The Rose in my Heart_, in
      _The National Observer_, November 12, 1892.

    _The Host of the Air._ Originally appeared, under the
      title _The Stolen Bride_, in _The Bookman_, Nov.,
      1893.

    _Breasal the Fisherman._ Originally appeared, under
      the title _Bressel the Fisherman_, in _The Cornish
      Magazine_, December, 1898.

    _A Cradle Song._ Originally appeared as the first of
      _Two Poems concerning Peasant Visionaries_, in _The
      Savoy_, April, 1896.

    _Into the Twilight._ For original appearance see _The
      Celtic Twilight_, 1893.

    _The Song of Wandering Aengus._

    _The Song of the Old Mother._ Originally appeared in
      _The Bookman_, April, 1894.

    _The Fiddler of Dooney._ Originally appeared in _The
      Bookman_, December, 1892.

    _The Heart of the Woman._ Originally appeared in the
      story _The Rose of Shadow_, in _The Secret Rose_.

    _Aedh Laments the Loss of Love._ Originally appeared as
      the second of _Aodh to Dectora. Three Songs_, in _The
      Dome_, May, 1898.

    _Mongan Laments the Change that has come upon him and
      his Beloved._ Originally appeared, under the title
      _The Desire of Man and of Woman_, in _The Dome_,
      June, 1897.

    _Michael Robartes bids his Beloved be at Peace._
      Originally appeared, under the title _The Shadowy
      Horses_, in _The Savoy_, January, 1896.

    _Hanrahan reproves the Curlew._ Originally appeared,
      under the title _Windlestraws_. 1. _OSullivan Rua to
      the Curlew_, in _The Savoy_, November, 1896.

    _Michael Robartes remembers forgotten Beauty._
      Originally appeared, under the title _OSullivan Rua
      to Mary Lavell_, in _The Savoy_, July, 1896.

    _A Poet to his Beloved._ Originally appeared, under the
      title _OSullivan the Red to Mary Lavell_, in _The
      Senate_, March, 1896.

    _Aedh gives his Beloved certain Rhymes_. Originally
      appeared in the story _The Binding of the Hair_. See
      _The Secret Rose_, 1897.

    _To my Heart, bidding it have no Fear._ Originally
      appeared, under the title _Windlestraws_. 11. _Out of
      the Old Days_, in _The Savoy_, November, 1896.

    _The Cap and Bells._ Originally appeared, under the
      title _Cap and Bell_, in _The National Observer_,
      March 17, 1894.

    _The Valley of the Black Pig._ Originally appeared,
      as the second of _Two Poems concerning Peasant
      Visionaries_, in _The Savoy_, April, 1896.

    _Michael Robartes asks Forgiveness because of his many
      Moods._ Originally appeared, under the title _The
      Twilight of Forgiveness_, in _The Saturday Review_,
      November 2, 1895.

    _Aedh tells of a Valley full of Lovers._ Originally
      appeared under the title _The Valley of Lovers_, in
      _The Saturday Review_, January 9, 1897.

    _Aedh tells of the perfect Beauty._ Originally
      appeared, under the title _OSullivan the Red to Mary
      Lavell_, in _The Senate_, March, 1896.

    _Aedh hears the Cry of the Sedge._ Originally appeared
      as the first of _Aodh to Dectora. Three Songs_, in
      _The Dome_, May, 1898.

    _Aedh thinks of those who have spoken Evil of his
      Beloved._ Originally appeared as the third of _Aodh
      to Dectora. Three Songs_, in _The Dome_, May, 1898.

    _The Blessed._ Originally appeared in _The Yellow
      Book_, Volume XIII, April, 1897.

    _The Secret Rose._ For original appearance see under
      _The Secret Rose_, 1897.

    _Hanrahan laments because of his Wanderings._
      Originally appeared, under the title _OSullivan
      the Red upon his Wanderings_, in _The New Review_,
      August, 1897.

    _The Travail of Passion._ Originally appeared in _The
      Savoy_, January, 1896.

    _The Poet pleads with his Friend for old Friends._
      Originally appeared, under the title _Song_, in _The
      Saturday Review_, July 24, 1897.

    _Hanrahan Speaks to the Lovers of his Songs in coming
      Days._ Originally appeared in the story _The Vision
      of Hanrahan the Red_. See _The Secret Rose_, 1897.

    _Aedh pleads with the Elemental Powers._ Originally
      appeared, under the title _Aodh Pleads with the
      Elemental Powers_, in _The Dome_, December, 1898.

    _Aedh wishes his Beloved were dead._

    _Aedh wishes for the Cloths of Heaven._

    _Mongan thinks of his past Greatness._ Originally
      appeared, under the title _Song of Mongan_, in _The
      Dome_, October, 1898.

    _Notes._




1900.


The Shadowy Waters | By W. B. Yeats | London: Hodder and | Stoughton |
27 Paternoster Row: MCM

    Cr. 4to, pp. 60. Cloth.


CONTENTS.

    _I walked among the seven woods of Coole._ Originally
      appeared, under the title _Introduction to a Dramatic
      Poem_, in _The Speaker_, December 1, 1900.

    _The Shadowy Waters._ Originally appeared in _The North
      American Review_, May, 1900.




1902.

The Celtic Twilight [in red] | By W. B. Yeats | A. H. Bullen, [in red]
18 Cecil Court | St. Martins Lane, London, W.C. | MCMII

    Cr. 8vo, pp. x and 236. Cloth.

Portrait by J. B. Yeats facing title-page.


CONTENTS.

    Poem: _Time drops in decay._

    _The Hosting of the Sidhe._

    _This Book._ I. 1893. II. 1902.

    _A Teller of Tales._

    _Belief and Unbelief._

    _Mortal Help._ Originally appeared in The Speaker,
      April 19, 1902.

    _A Visionary._ (With a new footnote.)

    _Village Ghosts._

    _Dust hath closed Helens Eye._ I. 1900. II. 1902.
      Part I originally appeared in _The Dome_, October,
      1899.

    _A Knight of the Sheep._

    _An Enduring Heart._ Originally appeared in _The
      Speaker_, April 26, 1902.

    _The Sorcerers._ (With a new footnote.)

    _The Devil._ Originally appeared in _The Speaker_,
      April 19, 1902.

    _Happy and Unhappy Theologians._ Originally appeared in
      _The Speaker_, February 15, 1902.

    _The Last Gleeman._

    _Regina, Regina Pigmeorum Veni._ (With a new footnote.)

    _And Fair, Fierce Women._ Originally appeared in _The
      Speaker_, April 19, 1902.

    _Enchanted Woods._ Originally appeared in _The
      Speaker_, January 18, 1902.

    _Miraculous Creatures._ Originally appeared in _The
      Speaker_, April 26, 1902.

    _Aristotle of the Books._ Originally appeared in _The
      Speaker_, April 19, 1902.

    _The Swine of the Gods._ Originally appeared in _The
      Speaker_, April 19, 1902.

    _A Voice._ Originally appeared in _The Speaker_, April
      19, 1902.

    _Kidnappers._ (With a new footnote.)

    _The Untiring Ones._ (With a new footnote.)

    _Earth, Fire and Water._ Originally appeared in _The
      Speaker_, March 15, 1902.

    _The Old Town._ Originally appeared in _The Speaker_,
      March 15, 1902.

    _The Man and his Boots._

    _A Coward._

    _The Three OByrnes and the Evil Faeries._

    _Drumcliffe and Rosses._

    _The Thick Skull of the Fortunate._ I. 1893. II. 1902.

    _The Religion of a Sailor._

    _Concerning the nearness together of Heaven, Earth and
      Purgatory._ 1892 and 1902.

    _The Eaters of Precious Stones._

    _Our Lady of the Hills._

    _The Golden Age._

    _A Remonstrance with Scotsmen for having soured the
      disposition of their Ghosts and Faeries._

    _War._ Originally appeared in _The Speaker_, March 15,
      1902.

    _The Queen and the Fool._ Originally appeared, under
      the title _The Fool of Faery_, in _The Kensington_,
      June, 1901.

    _The Friends of the People of Faery._ Originally
      appeared as part of an essay, _The Tribes of Danu_,
      in _The New Review_, November, 1897.

    _Dreams that have no moral._

    _By the Roadside._ Originally appeared in _An Claideamh
      Soluis_, July 13, 1901.

    _Into the Twilight._

Cathleen ni Hoolihan | A Play in One Act and | in Prose by W. B. Yeats
| (ornament) [in red] | Printed at the Caradoc | Press Chiswick for A.
H. | Bullen 18 Cecil Court Lon | don MDCCCCII

Pott 8vo, pp. vi (blank) and 34. Paper boards with leather back.
Printed in red and black.

_Cathleen ni Hoolihan_ originally appeared in _Samhain_, 1902.




1903.


Ideas of Good and [in red] | Evil. [in red] By W. B. Yeats | A. H.
Bullen [in red] 47 Great Russell | Street, London, W.C. MCMIII

Cr. 8vo, pp. viii and 342. Paper boards with cloth back.


CONTENTS.

    _What is Popular Poetry?_ Originally appeared in _The
      Cornhill Magazine_, March, 1902.

    _Speaking to the Psaltery._ Originally appeared in _The
      Monthly Review_, May, 1902.

    _Magic._ Originally appeared in _The Monthly Review_,
      September, 1901.

    _The Happiest of the Poets._ Originally appeared in
      _The Fortnightly Review_, March, 1903.

    _The Philosophy of Shelleys Poetry:_

      I. _His Ruling Ideas._ Originally appeared in _The
        Dome_, July, 1900.

      II. _His Ruling Symbols._

_At Stratford-on-Avon._ Originally appeared in _The Speaker_, May 11
and 18, 1901.

_William Blake and the Imagination._ Originally appeared under the
title _William Blake_, in _The Academy_, June 19, 1897.

_William Blake and his Illustrations to the Divine Comedy:_

      I. _His Opinions upon Art._ Originally appeared in
        _The Savoy_, July, 1896.

      II. _His Opinions upon Dante._ Originally appeared in
        _The Savoy_, August, 1896.

      III. _The Illustrations of Dante._ Originally
        appeared in _The Savoy_, September, 1896.

_Symbolism in Painting._ Originally appeared as part of the
introduction to _A Book of Images_, 1898.

_The Symbolism of Poetry._ Originally appeared in _The Dome_, April,
1900.

_The Theatre._ The first section of this essay originally appeared in
_The Dome_, April, 1899. The second originally appeared as part of an
essay, _The Irish Literary Theatre_, 1900, in _The Dome_, Jan., 1900.

_The Celtic Element in Literature._ The first section of this essay
originally appeared in _Cosmopolis_, June, 1898.

_The Autumn of the Body._ For original appearance see _The Autumn of
the Flesh_ in _Literary Ideals in Ireland_.

_The Moods._ Originally appeared as part of one of a series of articles
on _Irish National Literature_, in _The Bookman_, August, 1895.

_The Body of the Father Christian Rosencrux._ Originally appeared as
part of one of a series of articles on _Irish National Literature_, in
_The Bookman_, September, 1895.

_The Return of Ulysses._ Originally appeared, under the title _Mr.
Robert Bridges_, in _The Bookman_, June, 1897.

_Ireland and the Arts._ Originally appeared in _The United Irishman_,
August 31, 1901.

_The Galway Plains._ Originally appeared, under the title _Poets and
Dreamers_, in _The New Liberal Review_, March, 1903.

_Emotion of Multitude._


Where There is Nothing: | being Volume One of Plays | for an Irish
Theatre: by | W. B. Yeats | London: A. H. Bullen, 47, Great | Russell
Street, W.C. 1903.

Cr. 8vo, pp. xii and 132. Paper boards with cloth back.


CONTENTS.

    _Dedication of Volumes One and Two of Plays for an
      Irish Theatre._

    _Where There is Nothing._ Originally appeared as
      a supplement to _The United Irishman_, Samhain,
      (Autumn) 1902.


In the Seven Woods: being poems | chiefly of the Irish Heroic Age | By
William Butler Yeats | The Dun Emer Press | Dundrum | MCMIII

8vo, pp. viii [unnumbered, i-iv blank] and 68 [the last four blank].
Linen with paper label. The book printed in red and black.


CONTENTS.

    _In the Seven Woods._

    _The Old Age of Queen Maeve._ Originally appeared in
      _The Fortnightly Review_, April, 1903.

    _Baile and Aillinn._ Originally appeared in _The
      Monthly Review_, July, 1902.

    _The Arrow._

    _The Folly of Being Comforted._ Originally appeared in
      _The Speaker_, January 11, 1902.

    _The Withering of the Boughs._ Originally appeared,
      under the title _Echtge of Streams_, in _The
      Speaker_, August 25, 1900.

    _Adams Curse._ Originally appeared in _The Monthly
      Review_, December, 1902.

    _The Song of Red Hanrahan._ Originally appeared, under
      the title _Cathleen, Daughter of Hoolihan_, in _A
      Broadsheet_, April, 1903.

    _The Old Men admiring themselves in the Water._
      Originally appeared in _The Pall Mall Magazine_,
      January, 1903.

    _Under the Moon._ Originally appeared in _The Speaker_,
      June 15, 1901.

    _The Players ask for a Blessing on the Psalteries and
      themselves._

    _The Rider from the North._ Originally appeared, under
      the title _The Happy Townland_, in _The Weekly
      Critical Review_, June, 1903.

    _On Bailes Strand, a Play._

    Edition limited to 325 copies.


The Hour-Glass | a Morality | By | W. B. Yeats | London | Wm.
Heinemann, 21 Bedford St., W.C. | 1903

    Demy 8vo, pp. 16 [the last two blank].

    _The Hour-Glass_ originally appeared in _The North
      American Review_, September, 1903.

A few copies only of this edition were printed, for purposes of
copyright.




1904.


The Hour-Glass, Cathleen | ni Hoolihan, The Pot of | Broth: Being
Volume Two of | Plays for an Irish Theatre: | By W. B. Yeats | London:
A. H. Bullen, 47, Great | Russell Street, W.C. 1904.

Cr. 8vo, pp. viii and 84. Paper boards with cloth back.


CONTENTS.

    _The Hour-Glass: A Morality._ For original appearance
      see above, under date 1903.

    _Cathleen ni Hoolihan._ For original appearance see
      above, under date 1902.

    _The Pot of Broth._

    _Note on the Music._


The Kings Threshold: and | On Bailes Strand: Being | Volume Three of
Plays | for an Irish Theatre: By | W. B. Yeats | London: A. H. Bullen,
47, Great | Russell Street, W.C. 1904.

Cr. 8vo, pp. viii and 120. Paper boards with cloth back.


CONTENTS.

    _Note._

    _A Prologue._ Originally appeared in _The United
      Irishman_, September 9, 1903.

[The Prologue, which was accidentally dropped from later editions, ran
thus:

A PROLOGUE.[H]

    _An _Old Man_ with a red dressing-gown, red slippers
      and red night-cap, holding a brass candlestick with a
      guttering candle in it, comes on from side of stage
      and goes in front of the dull green curtain._

_Old Man._ Ive got to speak the prologue. [_He shuffles on a few
steps._] My nephew, who is one of the play actors, came to me, and I
in my bed, and my prayers said, and the candle put out, and he told me
there were so many characters in this new play, that all the company
were in it, whether they had been long or short at the business, and
that there wasnt one left to speak the prologue. Wait a bit, theres a
draught here. [_He pulls the curtain closer together._] Thats better.
And thats why I am here, and maybe Im a fool for my pains.

And my nephew said, there are a good many plays to be played for you,
some to-night and some on other nights through the winter, and the most
of them are simple enough, and tell out their story to the end. But as
to the big play you are to see to-night, my nephew taught me to say
what the poet had taught him to say about it. [_Puts down candlestick
and puts right finger on left thumb._] First, he who told the story of
Seanchan on King Guaires threshold long ago in the old books told it
wrongly, for he was a friend of the king, or maybe afraid of the king,
and so he put the king in the right. But he that tells the story now,
being a poet, has put the poet in the right.

And then [_touches other finger_] I am to say: Some think it would be a
finer tale if Seanchan had died at the end of it, and the king had the
guilt at his door, for that might have served the poets cause better
in the end. But that is not true, for if he that is in the story but
a shadow and an image of poetry had not risen up from the death that
threatened him, the ending would not have been true and joyful enough
to be put into the voices of players and proclaimed in the mouths of
trumpets, and poetry would have been badly served. [_He takes up the
candlestick again._

And as to what happened Seanchan after, my nephew told me he didnt
know, and the poet didnt know, and its likely theres nobody that
knows. But my nephew thinks he never sat down at the kings table
again, after the way he had been treated, but that he went to some
quiet green place in the hills with Fedelm, his sweetheart, where the
poor people made much of him because he was wise, and where he made
songs and poems, and its likely enough he made some of the old songs
and the old poems the poor people on the hillsides are saying and
singing to-day. [_A trumpet-blast._

Well, its time for me to be going. That trumpet means that the curtain
is going to rise, and after a while the stage there will be filled up
with great ladies and great gentlemen, and poets, and a king with a
crown on him, and all of them as high up in themselves with the pride
of their youth and their strength and their fine clothes as if there
was no such thing in the world as cold in the shoulders, and speckled
shins, and the pains in the bones and the stiffness in the joints that
make an old man that has the whole load of the world on him ready for
his bed.

    [_He begins to shuffle away, and then stops._

And it would be better for me, that nephew of mine to be thinking less
of his play-acting, and to have remembered to boil down the knap-weed
with a bit of threepenny sugar, for me to be wetting my throat with now
and again through the night, and drinking a sup to ease the pains in my
bones.

    [_He goes out at side of stage._]

    _The Kings Threshold._

    _On Bailes Strand._ Originally appeared in _In the
      Seven Woods_, 1903.

Stories of Red Hanrahan by | William Butler Yeats | The Dun Emer Press
| Dundrum MCMIV

8vo, pp. viii [unnumbered, i-ii blank] and 64 [last seven blank].
Paper boards with linen back, paper labels on front and side. The book
printed in red and black; woodcut under Table of Contents on p. viii.


CONTENTS.

    _Red Hanrahan._ Originally appeared in _The Independent
      Review_, December, 1903.

    _The Twisting of the Rope._

    _Hanrahan and Cathleen the daughter of Hoolihan._

    _Red Hanrahans Curse._

    _Hanrahans Vision._ Originally appeared, under
      the title _Red Hanrahans Vision_, in _McClures
      Magazine_, March, 1905.

    _The Death of Hanrahan._

Edition limited to 500 copies.

These stories are a re-telling in simpler language of some of the
stories in _The Secret Rose_.




1906.


Poems, 1899-1905 [in red] | By W. B. Yeats | London: A. H. Bullen |
Dublin: Maunsel & Co., | Ltd. | 1906.

Cr. 8vo, pp. xvi and 280. Cloth.


CONTENTS.

    _Preface._ [Dated _In the Seven Woods_, 18 May, 1906.]

    _I walked among the seven woods of Coole._[I]

    _The Harp of Aengus._[I]

    _The Shadowy Waters._ [A new version.]

    _On Bailes Strand._ [A new version.] _The Song of the
      Women_ (pp. 102-104) originally appeared, under the
      title _Against Witchcraft_, in _The Shanachie_ [No.
      I., Spring, 1906].

    _In the Seven Woods_:

      _In the Seven Woods._[J]

      _The Old Age of Queen Maeve._[J]

      _Baile and Aillinn._[J]

      _The Arrow._[J]

      _The Folly of being Comforted._[J]

      _Old Memory._ Originally appeared in _Wayfarers
        Love_, 1904.

      _Never Give all the Heart._ Originally appeared in
        _McClures Magazine_, December, 1905.

      _The Withering of the Boughs._[I]

      _Adams Curse._[I]

      _The Song of Red Hanrahan._[I]

      _The Old Men admiring themselves in the Water._[I]

      _Under the Moon._[I]

      _The Players ask for a Blessing on the Psalteries and
        themselves._[I]

      _The Happy Townland._[I]

      _The Entrance of Deirdre._ Two verses of this poem
        originally appeared, under the title _Queen
        Edaine_, in _McClures Magazine_, September, 1905,
        and the whole poem under the title _The Praise of
        Deirdre_, in _The Shanachie_ [No. I., Spring, 1906].

_The Kings Threshold._ [A new version.]

_Notes._




1907.


The Shadowy Waters, | By W. B. Yeats. | Acting Version, | As first
played at the Abbey Theatre, December 8th, 1906. | A. H. Bullen, | 47
Great Russell Street, London, W.C. | 1907.

Cr. 8vo, pp. 28. Green paper cover.

This is a slightly different version from that printed in _Poems_,
1899-1905.

Deirdre By W. B. Yeats | Being Volume Five of Plays | for an Irish
Theatre | London: A. H. Bullen | Dublin: Maunsel & Co., Ltd. | 1907.

Cr. 8vo, pp. viii and 48. Paper boards with cloth back.


CONTENTS.

    _Deirdre._ For original appearance of the song _Why is
      it, Queen Edain said_, see _The Entrance of Deirdre_,
      in _Poems_, 1899-1905.

    _Note._

Discoveries; A Volume of Essays | By William Butler Yeats. | (Woodcut)
| Dun Emer Press | Dundrum | MCMVII

8vo, pp. xvi [unnumbered, i-xi blank] and 56 [the last eleven blank].
Paper boards with linen back. The book printed in red and black.


CONTENTS.

    _Prophet, Priest and King._

    _Personality and the Intellectual Essences._

    _The Musician and the Orator._

    _A Banjo Player._

    _The Looking-glass._

      These five chapters appeared, under the general title
        _My Thoughts and my Second Thoughts_, in _The
        Gentlemans Magazine_, September, 1906.

_The Tree of Life._

_The Praise of Old Wives Tales._

_The Play of Modern Manners._

_Has the Drama of Contemporary Life a Root of its Own?_

_Why the Blind Man in Ancient Times was made a Poet._

      These five chapters appeared, under the general
        title _My Thoughts and my Second Thoughts_, in The
        Gentlemans Magazine, October, 1906.

_Concerning Saints and Artists._

_The Subject Matter of Drama._

_The Two Kinds of Asceticism._

_In the Serpents Mouth._

_The Black and the White Arrows._

_His Mistresss Eyebrows._

_The Tresses of the Hair._

      These seven chapters appeared, under the general
        title _My Thoughts and my Second Thoughts_, in _The
        Gentlemans Magazine,_ November, 1906.

_A Tower on the Apennine._

_The Thinking of the Body._

_Religious Belief necessary to symbolic Art._

_The Holy Places._

      These four chapters appeared, under the general title
        _Discoveries_, in The _Shanachie_, Autumn, 1907.

Edition limited to 200 copies.




1908.


The Collected Works in Verse and Prose of William Butler Yeats.
Imprinted at the Shakespeare Head Press, Stratford-on-Avon, MCMVIII.

Eight volumes. Demy 8vo. Quarter vellum back with grey linen sides.
With portraits by John S. Sargent, R.A., Signor Mancini, Charles
Shannon and J. B. Yeats.


VOLUME I.


CONTENTS.

    _The Wind Among the Reeds._

    _The Old Age of Queen Maeve._

    _Baile and Aillinn._

    _In the Seven Woods._

    _Ballads and Lyrics._

    _The Rose._

    _The Wanderings of Oisin._

    _Notes._

A few poems have been moved from _The Wind Among the Reeds_ to _Ballads
and Lyrics_ and _The Rose_. Two poems are added to _In the Seven
Woods_. These are:

    _The Hollow Wood._ Originally appeared in _The Twisting
      of the Rope_ in _Stories of Red Hanrahan_, 1904.

    _O do not love too long._ Originally appeared in _The
      Acorn_, October, 1905.


VOLUME II.

    _The Kings Threshold._

    _On Bailes Strand._

    _Deirdre._

    _The Shadowy Waters._

    _Appendix I: Acting Version of The Shadowy Waters._

    _Appendix II: A different version of Deirdres
      entrance._

    _Appendix III: The Legendary and Mythological
      Foundation of the Plays._

    _Appendix IV_: The Dates and Places of Performance of
      Plays.


VOLUME III.

    _The Countess Cathleen._

    _The Land of Hearts Desire._

    _The Unicorn from the Stars._ By Lady Gregory and W. B.
      Yeats.

    _Appendix: The Countess Cathleen._

    _Notes._

    _Music_ by Florence Farr and others.


VOLUME IV.

    _The Hour-Glass._

    _Cathleen ni Houlihan._

    _The Golden Helmet._

    _The Irish Dramatic Movement._ Under this title are
      printed the greater part of Mr. Yeatss contributions
      to _Samhain_, 1901-1906, and to _The Arrow_,
      1906-1907, and two essays, _An Irish National
      Theatre_ and _The Theatre, the Pulpit, and the
      Newspapers_, which originally appeared in _The United
      Irishman_, October 10 and 17, 1903.

    _Appendix I: The Hour-Glass._

    _Appendix II: Cathleen ni Hoolihan._

    _Appendix III: The Golden Helmet._

    _Appendix IV_: Dates and Places of the First
      Performance of New Plays produced by the National
      Theatre Society and its predecessors.


VOLUME V.

    _The Celtic Twilight._

    _Stories of Red Hanrahan._


VOLUME VI.

    _Ideas of Good and Evil._


VOLUME VII.

    _The Secret Rose._

[The _Red Hanrahan_ stories are here omitted from _The Secret Rose_ as
the later versions of them appear in Volume V. Two other stories which
appeared in the volume of 1897 are also omitted.]

    _Rosa Alchemica._

    _The Tables of the Law._

    _The Adoration of the Magi._

    _John Sherman._ With a new Preface.

    _Dhoya._


VOLUME VIII.

    _Discoveries._

    _Edmund Spenser._ Originally appeared as the
      introduction to _Poems of Spenser_, 1906.

    _Poetry and Tradition._

    _Modern Irish Poetry._ Originally appeared as the
      introduction to _A Book of Irish Verse_, 1895.

    _Lady Gregorys Cuchulain of Muirthemne._ Originally
      appeared as the preface to _Cuchulain of Muirthemne_,
      1902.

    _Lady Gregorys Gods and Fighting Men._ Originally
      appeared as the preface to _Gods and Fighting Men_,
      1904.

    _Mr. Synge and his Plays._ Originally appeared as the
      introduction to _The Well of the Saints_, 1905.

    _Lionel Johnson._ For original appearance see _A
      Treasury of Irish Poetry_, 1900.

    _The Pathway._ Originally appeared, under the title
      _The Way of Wisdom_, in _The Speaker_, April 14, 1900.




PART II.

BOOKS EDITED OR CONTRIBUTED TO BY W. B. YEATS.




1888.


Poems and Ballads | of | Young Ireland | 1888 | Were one at heart if
you be Irelands friend, | Though leagues asunder our opinions tend; |
There are but two great parties in the end.| Allingham. | Dublin | M.
H. Gill and Son | OConnell Street | 1888

Fcap. 8vo, pp. viii and 80. White buckram.

Mr. Yeatss contributions are:

    _The Stolen Child_, pp. 12-14.

    _King Goll_ (_Third Century_), pp. 43-46. Originally
      appeared in _The Leisure Hour_, September, 1887.

    _The Meditation of the Old Fisherman_, p. 59.
      Originally appeared in _The Irish Monthly_, October,
      1886.

    _Love Song._ _From the Gaelic_, p. 80.

Fairy and Folk Tales | of the Irish Peasantry: | Edited and Selected
by | W. B. Yeats. London: | Walter Scott, 24 Warwick Lane. | New York:
Thomas Whittaker | Toronto: W. J. Gage and Co. | 1888

Sm. cr. 8vo, pp. xx and 326. Cloth. A volume of _The Camelot Series_
(afterwards _The Scott Library_).

Mr. Yeatss contributions are:

    _Introduction_, pp. ix-xviii.

    _The Trooping Fairies_, pp. 1-3.

    _Notes_ on pp. 16, 33, 38.

    _Changelings_, p. 47.

    _The Stolen Child_, pp. 59-60. Reprinted from _Poems
      and Ballads of Young Ireland_, 1888.

    _The Merrow_, p. 61.

    _The Solitary Fairies_, pp. 80-81.

    _The Pooka_, p. 94.

    _The Banshee_, p. 108.

    _Ghosts_, pp. 128-129.

    _Witches, Fairy Doctors_, pp. 146-149.

    _Note_ on p. 150.

    _Tir-na-n-Og_, p. 200.

    _Saints, Priests_, p. 214.

    _The Priest of Coloony_, pp. 220-221.

    _Giants_, p. 260.

    _Notes_, pp. 319-326.

1893. Illustrated Edition.

Irish | Fairy and Folk Tales | Selected and Edited | with introduction
| by W. B. Yeats. | Twelve Illustrations by James Torrance. | London:
Walter Scott, Ltd. | 24 Warwick Lane.

Cr. 8vo, pp. xx and 326. Cloth.




1889.


Stories from Carleton: | With an introduction | by W. B. Yeats. |
London: Walter Scott, 24 Warwick Lane. | New York and Toronto: | W. J.
Gage & Co.

Sm. cr. 8vo, pp. xx and 302. Cloth. A volume of _The Camelot Classics_
(afterwards _The Scott Library_).

Mr. Yeatss Introduction includes pp. ix-xvii.




1890.


Representative | Irish Tales | Compiled, with an Introduction and Notes
| by | W. B. Yeats | First [Second] Series | (Ornament) | New York and
London | G. P. Putnams Sons | The Knickerbocker Press [Entire title
printed on a yellow ground and enclosed within a red line border.]

32mo. Vol. I., pp. vi and 340. Vol. II., pp. iv and 356. Decorated
boards with cloth backs.

Mr. Yeatss contributions are:


VOLUME I.

    _Dedication._ There was a green branch hung with many
      a bell. Pp. iii-iv.

    _Introduction_, pp. 1-17.

    _Maria Edgeworth_, pp. 19-24.

    _John and Michael Banim_, pp. 141-150.

    _William Carleton_, pp. 191-196.


VOLUME II.

    _Samuel Lover_, pp. 1-3.

    _William Maginn_, pp. 91-92.

    _T. Crofton Croker_, pp. 129-130.

    _Gerald Griffin_, pp. 161-164.

    _Charles Lever_, pp. 205-209.

    _Charles Kickham_, pp. 243-245.

    _Miss Rosa Mulholland_, p. 281.

    _Note_, p. 331.




1892.


Irish | Fairy Tales | edited | with an introduction | by | W. B. Yeats
| author of The Wanderings of Oisin, etc. | Illustrated by Jack B.
Yeats | London | T. Fisher Unwin | 1892

Fcap. 8vo, pp. viii and 236. Cloth. A volume of _The Childrens
Library_.

Mr. Yeatss contributions are:

    Poem. _Where my books go._ (Dated London, Jan.,
      1892.) P. v.

    _Introduction. An Irish Story-teller._ (Dated
      Clondalkin, July, 1891.) Pp. 1-7.

    _Note_ on pp. 8-9.

    _Appendix. Classification of Irish Fairies._ (Dated Co.
      Down, June, 1891.) Pp. 223-233.

    _Authorities of Irish Folklore_, pp. 234-236.

The Book | of the | Rhymers Club | (Press mark) | London | Elkin
Mathews | At the Sign of the Bodley Head | in Vigo Street | 1892 | All
rights reserved

Royal 16mo, pp. xvi and 94. Paper boards.

Mr. Yeatss contributions are:

    _A Man who dreamed of Fairyland_, pp. 7-9. Originally
      appeared in _The National Observer_, February 7, 1891.

    _Father Gilligan_, pp. 38-40. Originally appeared in
      _The Scots Observer_, July 5, 1890.

    _Dedication of Irish Tales,_ pp. 54-55. Originally
      appeared in _Representative Irish Tales_, 1890.

    _A Fairy Song_, p. 71. Originally appeared in _The
      National Observer_, September 12, 1891.

    _The Lake Isle of Innisfree_, p. 84. Originally
      appeared in _The National Observer_, Dec. 13, 1890.

    _An Epitaph_, p. 88. Originally appeared in _The
      National Observer_, December 12, 1891.

The | Poets [in red] | and the | Poetry [in red] | of the | Century [in
red] | Charles Kingsley | to | James Thomson | Edited by [in red] |
Alfred H. Miles [in red] | Hutchinson & Co. | 25, Paternoster Square,
London

Post 8vo, pp. xx and 652. Cloth.

Mr. Yeats contributes a note on William Allingham, pp. 209-212.

The | Poets [in red] | and the | Poetry [in red] | of the | Century
[in red] | Joanna Baillie | to | Mathilde Blind | Edited by [in red]
| Alfred H. Miles [in red] | Hutchinson & Co. 25, Paternoster Square,
London

Post 8vo, pp. xvi and 640. Cloth.

Mr. Yeats contributes a note on Ellen OLeary, pp. 449-452.




1893.


The Works | of | William Blake | Poetic, Symbolic, and Critical |
Edited with Lithographs of the Illustrated | Prophetic Books, and
a Memoir | and Interpretation | by | Edwin John Ellis | Author of
Fate in Arcadia, &c. | and | William Butler Yeats | Author of The
Wanderings of Oisin, The Countess Kathleen, &c. | Bring me to the
test | And I the matter will reword, which madness | Would gambol from
| Hamlet | In Three Vols. | Vol. I. [II. III.] | London | Bernard
Quaritch, 15 Piccadilly | 1893 | [All Rights Reserved]

Three volumes. Royal 8vo. Cloth.

The Poems | of | William Blake [in red] | Edited by | W. B. Yeats. |
(Press mark of Lawrence and Bullen)

              London:             |              New York:
    in] Lawrence and Bullen [red  |  in] Charles Scribners Sons [red
      16 Henrietta Street, W.C.   |          743 & 745 Broadway
               1893.              |                1893.

18mo, pp. liv and 252. Cloth. A volume of _The Muses Library_.

Mr. Yeatss contributions are:

    _Introduction_, pp. xv-liv.

    _Notes_, pp. 235-251.




1894.


The Second Book | of | The Rhymers Club | London: Elkin Mathews & John
Lane | New York: Dodd, Mead & Company | 1894 | All rights reserved

Royal 16mo, pp. xvi and 136. Cloth.

Mr. Yeatss contributions are:

    _The Rose in my Heart_, p. 11. Originally appeared in
      _The National Observer_, November 12, 1892.

    _The Folk of the Air_, pp. 37-39. Originally appeared,
      under the title _The Stolen Bride_, in _The Bookman_,
      November, 1893.

    _The Fiddler of Dooney_, pp. 68-69. Originally appeared
      in _The Bookman_, December, 1892.

    _A Mystical Prayer to the Masters of the
      ElementsFinvarra, Feacra, and Caolte_, pp. 91-92.
      Originally appeared, under the title _A Mystical
      Prayer to the Masters of the Elements, Michael,
      Gabriel, and Raphael_, in _The Bookman_, October,
      1892.

    _The Cap and Bells_, pp. 108-109. Originally appeared,
      under the title _Cap and Bell_, in _The National
      Observer_, March 17, 1894.

    _The Song of the Old Mother_, p. 126. Originally
      appeared in _The Bookman_, April, 1894.




1895.


A Book of | Irish Verse | Selected from modern writers | with an
introduction | and notes | by W. B. Yeats | Methuen & Co | 36 Essex
Street, W.C. | London | 1895.

Cr. 8vo, pp. xxviii and 260. Linen.

Mr. Yeatss contributions are:

    _Introduction._ (Dated August 5, 1894.) Pp. xi-xxvii.

    _Acknowledgment_, p. xxviii.

    _Notes_, pp. 250-257.

1900. Revised edition.

This contains a new Preface, dated August 15, 1899, and the
introduction much revised and now entitled _Modern Irish Poetry_. The
selection of poetry is also revised.




1898.


A Book of Images | Drawn by W. T. | Horton & Intro-|duced by W. B.
Yeats| London at the Unicorn | Press VII Cecil Court St. | Martins
Lane MDCCCXCVIII

Fcap. 4to, pp. 62. Cloth. Number II. of _The Unicorn Quartos_.

Mr. Yeatss Introduction includes pp. 7-16.




1899.


Literary | Ideals in | Ireland. | By John Eglinton; | W. B. Yeats | A.
E.; | W. Larminie. | Published by T. Fisher Unwin, London. | And at the
Daily Express Office, Dublin.

Long 8vo, pp. ii and 88. Paper covers.

Mr. Yeatss contributions are:

    _A Note on National Drama_, pp. 17-20. Originally
      appeared, as part of an essay under the title _The
      Poems and Stories of Miss Nora Hopper_, in _The
      Dublin Daily Express_, September 24, 1898.

    _John Eglinton and Spiritual Art_, pp. 31-37.
      Originally appeared in _The Dublin Daily Express_,
      October 29, 1898.

    _The Autumn of the Flesh_, pp. 69-75. Originally
      appeared in _The Dublin Daily Express_, December 3,
      1898.




1899.-1900.


Beltaine. An Occasional Publication. Edited by W. B. Yeats.

    No. 1. May, 1899.

    Mr. Yeatss contributions are:

      _Plans and Methods_, pp. 6-9. Some of these notes
        originally appeared as part of an essay _The Irish
        Literary Theatre_, in _The Dublin Daily Express_,
        January 14, 1899.

      Two lyrics, reprinted from _The Countess Cathleen_.

      _The Theatre._ Originally appeared in _The Dome_,
        April, 1899.

No. 2. February, 1900.

Mr. Yeatss contributions are:

      _Plans and Methods_, pp. 3-6.

      _Maive and certain Irish Beliefs_, pp. 14-17.

      _Footnote_ on p. 21.

      _The Irish Literary Theatre_, 1900, pp. 22-24.
        Originally appeared in _The Dome_, January, 1900.

No. 3. April, 1900.

This number contained only an essay by Mr. Yeats entitled _The Last
Feast of the Fianna, Maive, and The Bending of the Bough in
Dublin_.

These three numbers were afterwards issued in one volume, with the
wrappers and advertisements bound in, by the Unicorn Press in 1900.




1900.


A Treasury | of | Irish Poetry | in the | English Tongue | edited by |
Stopford A. Brooke | and | T. W. Rolleston | London | Smith, Elder, &
Co., 15 Waterloo Place | 1900 | All rights reserved

Cr. 8vo, pp. xliv and 580. Cloth.

Mr. Yeats contributes notes on:

    _Lionel Johnson_, pp. 465-467. Originally appeared,
      under the title _Mr. Lionel Johnson and certain Irish
      Poets_, in _The Dublin Daily Express_, Aug. 27, 1898.

    _Nora Hopper_, pp. 471-473. Originally appeared as
      part of an essay _The Poems and Stories of Miss Nora
      Hopper_, in _The Dublin Daily Express_, September 24,
      1898.

    _Althea Gyles_, p. 475.

    _A.E._, pp. 485-487. Originally appeared under the
      title _The Poetry of A.E._, in _The Dublin Daily
      Express_, September 3, 1898.

The book also reprints the following poems:

    _The Hosting of the Sidhe._

    _Michael Robartes remembers Forgotten Beauty._

    _The Rose of the World._

    _The Lake Isle of Innisfree._

    _When you are Old._

    _A Dream of a Blessed Spirit._

    _The Lamentation of the Old Pensioner._

    _The Two Trees._

    _The Island of Sleep._ (A passage from _The Wanderings
      of Oisin_.)




1901.


Ideals in | Ireland | Edited by Lady Gregory | Written by A.E., D. P.
| Moran, George Moore, | Douglas Hyde, Standish | OGrady, and W. B.
Yeats | London: At the Unicorn | VII Cecil Court MDCCCCI

Cr. 8vo, pp. 108. Cloth.

Mr. Yeatss contributions are:

    _The Literary Movement in Ireland_, pp. 87-102.
      Originally appeared in _The North American Review_,
      December, 1899.

    _A Postscript_, pp. 105-107.

Samhain Edited | for the Irish Literary Theatre | by W. B. Yeats. |
Published in October 1901 by | Sealy Bryers & Walker and | by T. Fisher
Unwin.

Fcap. 4to, pp. 40. Brown paper covers.

Mr. Yeatss contributions are:

    _Windlestraws_, pp. 3-10.

    _Footnote_ on p. 12.




1902.


Cuchulain of Muirthemne: | The Story of the Men of | The Red Branch
of Ulster | Arranged and put into | English by Lady Gregory. | With a
Preface by W. B. Yeats | London | John Murray, Albemarle Street | 1902.

Large Cr. 8vo, pp. xx and 364. Cloth.

Mr. Yeatss contributions are:

    _Preface._ (Dated March, 1902.) Pp. vii-xvii.

    _Note on the Conversation of Cuchulain and Emer_, pp.
      351-353.

Samhain: An occasional | review edited by W. B. Yeats. | Published in
October 1902 by | Sealy Bryers & Walker and | by T. Fisher Unwin.

Fcap. 4to, pp. 32. Brown paper covers.

Mr. Yeatss contributions are:

    _Notes_, pp. 3-10.

    _Cathleen ni Hoolihan_, pp. 24-31.




1903.


Samhain: An occasional | review edited by W. B. Yeats. | Published in
September 1903 | by Sealy Bryers & Walker | and by T. Fisher Unwin.

Fcap. 4to, pp. 36. Brown paper covers.

Mr. Yeatss contributions are:

    _Notes_, pp. 3-8.

    _The Reform of the Theatre_, pp. 9-12. Part of this
      essay originally appeared in _The United Irishman_,
      April 4, 1903.




1904.


Gods and Fighting Men: | The Story of the Tuatha de | Danaan and of the
Fianna | of Ireland, arranged and | put into English by Lady | Gregory.
With a preface | by W. B. Yeats | London | John Murray, Albemarle
Street, W. | 1904

Large cr. 8vo, pp. xxviii and 480.

Mr. Yeatss Preface includes pp. ix-xxiv.

Wayfarers Love | Contributions from Living Poets | edited by | The
Duchess of Sutherland. | Cover design by Mr. Walter Crane. | Let
me take your hand for love and sing you a song, | said the other
travellerthe journey is a hard journey, but | if we hold together in
the morning and in the evening, | what matter if in the hours between
there is sorrow. | Old Tale. | Westminster | Archibald Constable &
Co., Ltd. | 1904

Mr. Yeats contributes _Old Memory_, p. 37.

Samhain: An occasional | review edited by W. B. Yeats. | Published in
December 1904 | by Sealy Bryers & Walker | and by T. Fisher Unwin.

Fcap. 4to, pp. 56. Brown paper covers.

Mr. Yeatss contributions are:

    _The Dramatic Movement_, pp. 3-12.

    _First Principles_, pp. 12-24.

    _The Play, the Player, and the Scene_, pp. 24-33.

    _Footnote to An Opinion,_ p. 55.




1905.


Samhain: An occasional | review edited by W. B. Yeats. | Published in
November 1905 | by Maunsel & Co., Ltd., | and by A. H. Bullen.

Mr. Yeats contributes _Notes and Opinions_, pp. 3-14.

The Well of the Saints. | By J. M. Synge. With an intro- | duction by
W. B. Yeats. Be- | ing Volume Four of Plays | for an Irish Theatre |
London: A. H. Bullen, 47, Great | Russell Street, W.C. 1905.

Cr. 8vo, pp. xviii and 92. Paper boards with cloth back.

Mr. Yeatss Introduction, _Mr. Synge and his Plays_, dated Abbey
Theatre, January 27, 1905, includes pp. v-xvii.




1906.


Poems | of | Spenser | Selected and with | an Introduction by | W. B.
Yeats. | T. C. & E. C. Jack. | Edinburgh. [The whole forms part of a
design by A. S. Hartrick.]

Sm. cr. 8vo, pp. xlviii and 292. Cloth.

Mr. Yeatss Introduction includes pp. xiii-xlvii.

Samhain: An occasional | review edited by W. B. Yeats. | Published in
December 1906 | by Maunsel & Co., Ltd., | Dublin.

Fcap. 4to, pp. 40. Brown paper covers.

Mr. Yeatss contributions are:

    _Notes_, p. 3.

    _Literature and the Living Voice_, pp. 4-14. Originally
      appeared in _The Contemporary Review_, October, 1906.




1906-7.


The Arrow. Edited by W. B. Yeats.

Mr. Yeatss contributions are:

    No. 1. October 20, 1906.

      _The Seasons Work._

      _A Note on The Mineral Workers._

      _Notes._

No. 2. November 24, 1906.

      _Notes._

      _Deirdre._ (A note.)

      _The Shadowy Waters._ (A note.)

No. 3. February 23, 1907.

      _The Controversy over The Playboy._

      _Passages reprinted from the Samhain of 1905._

      _Opening Speech at the debate of February 4 at the
        Abbey Theatre._

No. 4. June 1, 1907.

      _Notes._


NOTE.

The selections for the following books issued by the Dun Emer Press,
Dundrum, were made by Mr. Yeats, but the books contain no contributions
by him:

    Twenty-one _Poems_ by Lionel Johnson, 1904.

    _Some Essays and Passages_ by John Eglinton, 1905.

    Sixteen _Poems_ by William Allingham, 1905.

    Twenty-one _Poems_ by Katherine Tynan, 1907.




PART III.

CONTRIBUTIONS TO PERIODICALS.

[This part gives a chronological list of Mr. Yeatss contributions to
periodicals, including those that afterwards have been gathered into
books. It seemed better to risk a certain amount of repetition in
noting the later history of the collected writings than to set folk
astray with a misleading list of titles.]




1885.


    _The Island of Statues. An Arcadian Faery Tale. In Two
      Acts._ The Dublin University Review, April-July.
      Reprinted under the title _Island of Statues_ in _The
      Wanderings of Oisin_, 1889.

    _Love and Death._ The Dublin University Review, May.

    _The Seeker. A Dramatic Poem. In Two Scenes._ The
      Dublin University Review, September. Reprinted,
      under the title _The Seeker_ in _The Wanderings of
      Oisin_, 1889.

    _An Epilogue. To The Island of Statues and The Seeker._
      The Dublin University Review, October. Reprinted
      under the title _Song of the Last Arcadian_ in _The
      Wanderings of Oisin_, 1889. Also under the title _The
      Song of the Happy Shepherd_ in _Poems_, 1895; and in
      the _Collected Works_, Vol. I.




1886.


    _In a Drawing Room._ (Unsigned.) The Dublin University
      Review, January. Reprinted, as the sixth and second
      of _Quatrains and Aphorisms_ in _The Wanderings of
      Oisin_, 1889.

    _Life._ The Dublin University Review, February. Five
      quatrains of which the first is reprinted as the
      first of _Quatrains and Aphorisms_ in _The Wanderings
      of Oisin_, 1889.

    _The Two Titans. A Political Poem._ The Dublin
      University Review, March.

    _On Mr. Nettleships Picture at the Royal Hibernian
      Academy._ The Dublin University Review, April.
      Reprinted in _The Wanderings of Oisin_, 1889.

    _Mosada._ The Dublin University Review, June.
      Reprinted in pamphlet form, 1886. Also in _The
      Wanderings of Oisin_, 1889.

    _Remembrance._ The Irish Monthly, July.

    _Miserrimus._ The Dublin University Review, October.
      Reprinted in _The Wanderings of Oisin_, 1889. Also,
      under the title _The Sad Shepherd_ in _Poems_, 1895;
      and in the _Collected Works_, Vol. I.

    _From the Book of Kauri the IndianSection V. On the
      Nature of God._ (Unsigned.) The Dublin University
      Review, October. Reprinted, under the title _Kanva,
      the Indian, on God_ in _The Wanderings of Oisin_,
      1889. Also, under the title _The Indian upon God_ in
      _Poems_, 1895; and in the _Collected Works_, Vol. I.

    _Meditation of an Old Fisherman._ The Irish Monthly,
      October. Reprinted in _Poems and Ballads of Young
      Ireland_, 1888. Also in _The Wanderings of Oisin_,
      1889; _Poems_, 1895; and in the _Collected Works_,
      Vol. I.

    _The Poetry of Sir Samuel Ferguson._ The Irish
      Fireside, October 9.

    _The Poetry of Sir Samuel Ferguson._ The Dublin
      University Review, November.

    _The Poetry of R. D. Joyce._ The Irish Fireside,
      November 27 and December 4.

    _The Stolen Child._ The Irish Monthly, December.
      Reprinted in _Poems and Ballads of Young Ireland_,
      1888. Also in _Fairy and Folk Tales of the Irish
      Peasantry_, 1888; _The Wanderings of Oisin_, 1889;
      _Poems_, 1895; and in the _Collected Works_, Vol. I.

    _An Indian Song._ The Dublin University Review,
      December. Reprinted in _The Wanderings of Oisin_,
      1889. Also, under the title _The Indian to his Love_
      in _Poems_, 1895; and in the _Collected Works_, Vol.
      I.




1887.


    _A Dawn-Song._ The Irish Fireside, February 5.

    _The Fairy Pedant._ The Irish Monthly, March.
      Reprinted in _The Wanderings of Oisin_, 1889.

    _Clarence Mangan._ The Irish Fireside, March 12.

    _Miss Tynans New Book._ The Irish Fireside, July 9.

    _King Goll. An Irish Legend._ The Leisure Hour,
      September. Reprinted in _Poems and Ballads of Young
      Ireland_, 1888. Also in _The Wanderings of Oisin_,
      1889; _Poems_, 1895; and in the _Collected Works_,
      Vol. I.

    _She who Dwelt among the Sycamores._ The Irish
      Monthly, September. Reprinted in _The Wanderings of
      Oisin_, 1889.

    _The Fairy Doctor._ The Irish Fireside, September,
      10. Reprinted in _The Wanderings of Oisin_, 1889.




1889.


    _Scots and Irish Fairies._ The Scots Observer, March
      2. Reprinted, under the title, _A Remonstrance with
      Scotsmen for having Soured the disposition of their
      Ghosts and Faeries_, in _The Celtic Twilight_, 1893
      and 1902; and in the _Collected Works_, Vol. V.

    _Village Ghosts._ The Scots Observer, May 11.
      Reprinted in _The Celtic Twilight_, 1893 and 1902;
      and in the _Collected Works_, Vol. V.

    _Kidnappers._ The Scots Observer, June 15. Reprinted
      in _The Celtic Twilight_, 1893 and 1902; and in the
      _Collected Works_, Vol. V.

    _Columkille and Rosses._ The Scots Observer, October
      5. Reprinted, under the title _Drumcliff and Rosses_
      in _The Celtic Twilight_, 1893 and 1902; and in the
      _Collected Works_, Vol. V.

    _The Ballad of the Old Foxhunter._ East and West,
      November. Reprinted in _The Countess Cathleen_, 1892.
      Also in _Poems_, 1895; and in the _Collected Works_,
      Vol. I.

    _Popular Ballad Poetry of Ireland._ The Leisure Hour,
      November.




1890.


    _Bardic Ireland._ The Scots Observer, January 4.

    _Street Dancers._ The Leisure Hour, March. This poem
      appeared in _The Wanderings of Oisin_, 1889.

    _Tales from the Twilight._ The Scots Observer, March
      1.

    _A Cradle Song._ The Scots Observer, April 19.
      Reprinted in _The Countess Cathleen_, 1892. Also in
      _Poems_, 1895; and in the _Collected Works_, Vol. I.

    _Father Gilligan._ (_A Legend told by the People of
      Castleisland, Kerry._) The Scots Observer, July 5.
      Reprinted in _The Book of the Rhymers Club_, 1892.
      Also in _The Countess Cathleen_, 1892; _Poems_, 1895;
      and in the _Collected Works_, Vol. I.

    _Irish Fairies._ The Leisure Hour, October. Reprinted
      in part, under the titles _Belief and Unbelief_,
      and _The Three OByrnes and the Evil Faeries_, in
      _The Celtic Twilight_, 1893 and 1902; and in the
      _Collected Works_, Vol. V.

    _Poetry and Science in Folk-Lore._ (A letter.) The
      Academy, October 11.

    _The Old Pensioner._ The Scots Observer, November 15.
      Reprinted in _The Countess Cathleen_, 1892. Also in
      _Poems_, 1895; and in the _Collected Works_, Vol. I.

    _The Lake Isle of Innisfree._ The National Observer,
      December 13. Reprinted in _The Book of the Rhymers
      Club_, 1892. Also in _The Countess Cathleen_, 1892;
      _Poems_, 1895; and in the _Collected Works_, Vol. I.




1891.


    _In the Firelight._ (A poem.) The Leisure Hour, Feb.

    _A Man who dreamed of Fairyland._ The National
      Observer, February 7. Reprinted in _The Book of
      the Rhymers Club_, 1892. Also in _The Countess
      Cathleen_, 1892; _Poems_, 1895; and in the _Collected
      Works_, Vol. I.

    _Irish Folk Tales._ The National Observer, Feb. 28.

    _Some recent books by Irish Writers._ The Boston
      Pilot, April 18.

    _Plays by an Irish Poet._ (The work of Dr. John
      Todhunter.) United Ireland, July 11.

    _Clarence Mangans Love Affair._ United Ireland,
      August 22.

    _A Fairy Song._ The National Observer, September 12.
      Reprinted in _The Book of the Rhymers Club_, 1892.
      Also in _The Countess Cathleen_, 1892; _Poems_, 1895;
      and in the _Collected Works_, Vol. I.

    _A Reckless Century. Irish Rakes and Duellists._
      United Ireland, September 12.

    _A Ballad Singer._ The Boston Pilot, September 12.

    _Oscars Wildes Last Book._ (Review of _Lord Arthur
      Saviles Crime_.) United Ireland, September 26.

    _An Irish Visionary._ The National Observer, October
      3. Reprinted, under the title _A Visionary_, in
      _The Celtic Twilight_, 1893 and 1902; and in the
      _Collected Works_, Vol. V.

    _The Young Ireland League._ United Ireland, Oct. 3.

    _Mournand then Onward._ (A poem.) United Ireland,
      October 10.

    _Kathleen._ The National Observer, October 31.
      Reprinted, under the title _A Dream of a Blessed
      Spirit_ in _Poems_, 1895. Also in the _Collected
      Works_, Vol. I.

    _An Epitaph._ The National Observer, December 12.
      Reprinted in _The Book of the Rhymers Club_, 1892;
      and in _The Countess Cathleen_, 1892. Also under the
      title _A Dream of Death_ in _Poems_, 1895; and in the
      _Collected Works_, Vol. I.

    _A Poet we have neglected._ (William Allingham.)
      United Ireland, December 12.




1892.


    _Rosa Mundi._ The National Observer, January 2.
      Reprinted, under the title _The Rose of the World_,
      in _The Countess Cathleen_, 1892. Also in _Poems_,
      1895; and in the _Collected Works_, Vol. I.

    _The New Speranza._ (Miss Maud Gonne.) United
      Ireland, January 16.

    _Dr. Todhunters Irish Poems._ (Review of _The
      Banshee_.) United Ireland, January 23.

    _Clovis Huges on Ireland._ United Ireland, Jan. 30.

    _The Peace of the Rose._ The National Observer, Feb.
      13. Reprinted in _The Countess Cathleen_, 1892. Also,
      under the title _The Rose of Peace_, in _Poems_,
      1895; and in the _Collected Works_, Vol. I.

    _The White Birds._ The National Observer, May 7.
      Reprinted in _The Countess Cathleen_, 1892. Also in
      _Poems_, 1895; and in the _Collected Works_, Vol. I.

    _Fergus and the Druid._ The National Observer, May
      21. Reprinted in _The Countess Cathleen_, 1892. Also
      in _Poems_, 1895; and in the _Collected Works_, Vol.
      I.

    _The Death of Cuchullin._ United Ireland, June 11.
      Reprinted in _The Countess Cathleen_, 1892. Also in
      _Poems_, 1895; and in the _Collected Works_, Vol. I.

    [Michael Fields] _Sight and Song_. (A review.) The
      Bookman, July.

    _The Irish Literary Society, London._ (A letter.)
      United Ireland, July 30.

    _Dublin Scholasticism and Trinity College._ United
      Ireland, July 30.

    _A New Poet._ (Review of _Fate in Arcadia_ by Edwin
      Ellis.) The Bookman, September.

    _Noetry and Poetry._ (Review of Savage Armstrongs
      collected verse.) The Bookman, September.

    _The National Literary Society Libraries Scheme._ (A
      letter.) United Ireland, September 24.

    _A Mystical Prayer to the Masters of the Elements,
      Michael, Gabriel and Raphael._ The Bookman, Oct.
      Reprinted, under the title _A Mystical Prayer to
      the Masters of the ElementsFinvarra, Feacra, and
      Caolte_, in _The Second Book of the Rhymers Club_,
      1894.

    _Hopes and Fears for Irish Literature._ United
      Ireland, October 15.

    _The Rose in my Heart._ The National Observer,
      November 12. Reprinted in _The Second Book of the
      Rhymers Club_, 1894. Also, under the title _Aedh
      tells of the Rose in his Heart_, in _The Wind Among
      the Reeds_, 1899; and in the _Collected Works_, Vol.
      I.

    _The Devils Book._ The National Observer, November
      26. Reprinted, under the title _The Book of the Great
      Dhoul and Hanrahan the Red_, in _The Secret Rose_,
      1897.

    [Tennysons] _The Death of none._ (A review.) The
      Bookman, December.

    _The Fiddler of Dooney._ The Bookman, December.
      Reprinted in _The Second Book of the Rhymers Club_,
      1894. Also in _The Wind Among the Reeds_, 1899; and
      in the _Collected Works_, Vol. I.

    _The De-Anglicising of Ireland._ (A letter.) United
      Ireland, December 17.

    _The Twisting of the Rope._ The National Observer,
      December 24. Reprinted, under the title _The Twisting
      of the Rope and Hanrahan the Red_, in _The Secret
      Rose_, 1897.




1893.


    [Kuno Meyers] _The Vision of MacConglinne._ (A
      review.) _The Bookman._ February.

    [Robert Buchanans] _The Wandering Jew._ (A review.)
      The Bookman, April.

    _The Heart of the Spring._ The National Observer,
      April 15. Reprinted in _The Secret Rose_, 1897; and
      in the _Collected Works_, Vol. VII.

    _The Danaan Quicken Tree._ (A poem.) The Bookman, May.

    _The Last Gleeman._ The National Observer, May 6.
      Reprinted in _The Celtic Twilight_, 1893 and 1902;
      and in the _Collected Works_, Vol. V.

    _Nationality and Literature._ (A lecture to the
      National Literary Society.) United Ireland, May 27.

    _Out of the Rose._ The National Observer, May 27.
      Reprinted in _The Secret Rose_, 1897; and in the
      _Collected Works_, Vol. VII.

    _The Celtic Twilight._ The National Observer, July
      29. Reprinted, under the title _Into the Twilight_,
      in _The Celtic Twilight_, 1893 and 1902. Also in
      the _The Wind Among the Reeds_, 1899; and in the
      _Collected Works_, Vol. I.

    _The Writings of William Blake._ (Review of a volume of
      _The Parchment Library_.) The Bookman, August.

    _The Moods._ The Bookman, August. Reprinted in _The
      Celtic Twilight_, 1893 and 1902. Also in _The Wind
      Among the Reeds_, 1899; and in the _Collected Works_,
      Vol. I.

    _The Curse of the Fires and of the Shadows._ The
      National Observer, August 5. Reprinted in _The
      Secret Rose_, 1897; and in the _Collected Works_,
      Vol. VII.

    _The Message of the Folk-Lorist._ The Speaker, August
      19.

    _Old Gaelic Love Songs._ (Review of _The Love Songs of
      Connacht_ by Douglas Hyde.) The Bookman, Oct.

    _The Faery Host._ The National Observer, October 7.
      Reprinted, under the title _The Host_, in _The Celtic
      Twilight_, 1893. Also, under the title _The Hosting
      of the Sidhe_, in _The Wind Among the Reeds_, 1899;
      _The Celtic Twilight_, 1902; and in the _Collected
      Works_, Vol. I.

    _An Impression._ The Speaker, October 21. Reprinted,
      under the title _A Knight of the Sheep_, in _The
      Celtic Twilight_, 1893 and 1902; and in the
      _Collected Works_, Vol. V.

    _The Stolen Bride._ The Bookman, November. Reprinted,
      under the title _The Folk of the Air_, in _The Second
      Book of the Rhymers Club_, 1894. Also, under the
      title _The Host of the Air_, in _The Wind Among the
      Reeds_, 1899; and in the _Collected Works_, Vol. I.

    _Our Lady of the Hills._ The Speaker, Nov. 11.
      Reprinted in _The Celtic Twilight_, 1893 and 1902;
      and in the _Collected Works_, Vol. V.

    _Wisdom and Dreams._ (A poem.) The Bookman, December.

    _Michael Clancy, the Great Dhoul, and Death._ The Old
      Country, a Christmas Annual, 1893.

    _The Celt: the Silenced Sister._ (Two letters.) United
      Ireland, December 23 and 30.




1894.


    [E. J. Elliss] _Seen in Three Days._ (A review.) The
      Bookman, February.

    _Cap and Bell._ The National Observer, March 17.
      Reprinted, under the title _The Cap and Bells_, in
      _The Second Book of the Rhymers Club_, 1894. Also
      in _The Wind Among the Reeds_, 1899; and in the
      _Collected Works_, Vol. I.

    _A Crucifixion._ The National Observer, March 24.
      Reprinted, under the title _The Crucifixion of the
      Outcast_, in _The Secret Rose_, 1897. Also in the
      _Collected Works_, Vol. VII.

    _The Song of the Old Mother._ The Bookman, April.
      Reprinted in _The Second Book of the Rhymers Club_,
      1894. Also in _The Wind Among the Reeds_, 1899; and
      in the _Collected Works_, Vol. I.

    _A Symbolical Drama in Paris._ (Note on a performance
      of _Axel_.) The Bookman, April.

    _The Evangel of Folklore._ (Review of William
      Larminies _West Irish Folk Tales_.) The Bookman,
      June.

    _Those Who Live in the Storm._ The Speaker, July 21.
      Reprinted, under the title _The Rose of Shadow_, in
      _The Secret Rose_, 1897.

    _A New Poet._ (Review of _Homeward_ by A. E.) The
      Bookman, August.

    _Kathleen-ny-Hoolihan._ The National Observer, Aug.
      4. Reprinted, under the title _Kathleen the Daughter
      of Hoolihan and Hanrahan the Red_, in _The Secret
      Rose_, 1897.

    _The Curse of OSullivan the Red upon Old Age._ The
      National Observer, September 29. Reprinted, under
      the title _The Curse of Hanrahan the Red_, in _The
      Secret Rose_, 1897.

    _The Stone and the Elixir._ (Review of Ibsens
      _Brand_.) The Bookman, October.




1895.


    _Battles Long Ago._ (Review of Standish OGradys _The
      Coming of Cuchullain_.) The Bookman, Feb.

    _An Excellent Talker._ (Review of Oscar Wildes _A
      Woman of No Importance_.) The Bookman, March.

    _To Some I have talked with by the fire._ The
      Bookman, May. Reprinted in _Poems_, 1895. Also in
      the _Collected Works_, Vol. I.

    _Dublin Mystics._ (Review of _Homeward_ by A. E., and
      of _Two Essays on the Remnant_ by John Eglinton.)
      The Bookman, May.

    [Douglas Hydes] _The Story of Early Gaelic
      Literature._ (A review.) The Bookman, June.

    _Irish National Literature. I. From Callanan to
      Carleton._ The Bookman, July.

    [Douglas Hydes] _The Three Sorrows of Story Telling._
      (A review.) The Bookman, July.

    _Irish National Literature. II. Contemporary Prose
      Writers. Mr. OGrady, Miss Lawless, Miss Barlow, Miss
      Hopper and the Folk-Lorists._ The Bookman, Aug. The
      first paragraph of this essay is reprinted, under the
      title _The Moods_, in _Ideas of Good and Evil_, 1903.
      Also in the _Collected Works_, Vol. VI.

    _That Subtle Shade._ (Review of _London Nights_ by
      Arthur Symons.) The Bookman, August.

    _Irish National Literature. III. Contemporary Irish
      Poets. Dr. Hyde, Mr. Rolleston, Mrs. Hinkson, Miss
      Nora Hopper, A. E., Mr. Aubrey de Vere, Dr. Todhunter
      and Mr. Lionel Johnson._ The Bookman, Sept. The
      first paragraph of this essay is reprinted, under the
      title _The Body of the Father Christian Rosencrux_,
      in _Ideas of Good and Evil_, 1903. Also in the
      _Collected Works_, Volume VI.

    _Wisdom._ The New Review, September. Reprinted, under
      the title _The Wisdom of the King_, in _The Secret
      Rose_, 1897. Also in the _Collected Works_, Vol. VII.

    _A Song of the Rosy Cross._ The Bookman, October.

    _Irish National Literature. IV. A List of the best
      Irish Books._ The Bookman, October.

    [Dr. Todhunters] _The Life of Patrick Sarsfield._ (A
      review.) The Bookman, November.

    _The Twilight of Forgiveness._ The Saturday Review,
      November 2. Reprinted, under the title _Michael
      Robartes asks Forgiveness because of his many Moods_,
      in _The Wind Among the Reeds_, 1899. Also in the
      _Collected Works_, Vol. I.

    _St. Patrick and the Pedants._ The Weekly Sun Literary
      Supplement, December 1. Reprinted, under the title
      _The Old Men of the Twilight_, in _The Secret Rose_,
      1897. Also in the _Collected Works_, Vol. VII.




1896.


    _The Shadowy Horses._ The Savoy, January. Reprinted,
      under the title _Michael Robartes bids his Beloved
      be at Peace_, in _The Wind Among the Reeds_, 1899.
      Also in the _Collected Works_, Vol. I. Translated
      into French by Stuart Merrill in _Vers et Prose_,
      MarchMay, 1905.

    _The Travail of Passion._ The Savoy, January.
      Reprinted in _The Wind Among the Reeds_, 1899.
      Also in the _Collected Works_, Vol. I. Translated
      into French by Stuart Merrill in _Vers et Prose_,
      MarchMay, 1905.

    _The Binding of the Hair._ The Savoy, January.
      Reprinted in _The Secret Rose_, 1897.

    _Everlasting Voices._ The New Review, January.
      Reprinted in _The Wind Among the Reeds_, 1899. Also
      in the _Collected Works_, Vol. I.

    _William Carleton._ (Review of _The Life of William
      Carleton_.) The Bookman, March.

    _OSullivan the Red to Mary Lavell._ The Senate,
      March. Two poems, reprinted, under the titles _Aedh
      tells of the perfect Beauty_ and _A Poet to his
      Beloved_, in _The Wind Among the Reeds_, 1899. Also
      in the _Collected Works_, Vol. I.

    _Rosa Alchemica._ The Savoy, April. Reprinted in _The
      Secret Rose_, 1897. Also in the _Collected Works_,
      Vol. VII. Translated into French by Henry D. Davray
      in _Le Mercure de France_, October, 1898.

    _Two Poems concerning Peasant Visionaries_:I. _A
      Cradle Song._ II. _The Valley of the Black Pig._
      The Savoy, April. Reprinted in _The Wind Among the
      Reeds_, 1899. Also in the _Collected Works_, Vol. I.

    _Verlaine in 1894._ The Savoy, April.

    _The Vision of OSullivan the Red._ The New Review,
      April. Reprinted, under the title _The Vision of
      Hanrahan the Red_, in _The Secret Rose_, 1897.

    _William Blake._ (Review of Dr. Richard Garnetts
      _William Blake_ in The Portfolio series of
      monographs.) The Bookman, April.

    _An Irish Patriot._ (Review of Lady Fergusons _Sir
      Samuel Ferguson in the Ireland of his Day_.) The
      Bookman, May.

    _The New Irish Library._ (Review of _Swift in Ireland,
      Owen Roe ONeill_, and _A Short Life of Thomas
      Davies_.) The Bookman, June.

    _OSullivan Rua to Mary Lavell._ The Savoy, July.
      Reprinted, under the title _Michael Robartes
      remembers forgotten Beauty_, in _The Wind Among the
      Reeds_, 1899. Also in the _Collected Works_, Vol. I.
      Translated into French by Stuart Merrill in _Vers et
      Prose_, MarchMay, 1905.

    _William Blake and his Illustrations to the Divine
      Comedy. I. His Opinions upon Art._ The Savoy, July.
      Reprinted in _Ideas of Good and Evil_, 1903. Also in
      the _Collected Works_, Vol. VI.

    _La Tristesse du Berger. Trois lgendes populaires
      d Irlande._ (Translations into French of _The
      Sad Shepherd_ and _The Untiring Ones_ by Henry D.
      Davray.) LErmitage, July.

    _William Blake and his Illustrations to the Divine
      Comedy. II. His Opinions upon Dante._ The Savoy,
      Aug. Reprinted in _Ideas of Good and Evil_, 1903.
      Also in the _Collected Works_, Vol. VI.

    _William Blake and his Illustrations to the Divine
      Comedy. III. The Illustrations of Dante._ The
      Savoy, September. Reprinted in _Ideas of Good and
      Evil_, 1903. Also in the _Collected Works_, Vol. VI.

    _Greek Folk Poetry._ (Review of Lucy M. Garnetts
      _Greek Folk Poesy_.) The Bookman, October.

    _Where there is Nothing, there is God._ The Sketch,
      October 21. Reprinted in _The Secret Rose_, 1897.
      Also in the _Collected Works_, Vol. VII.

    _Windlestraws._ The Savoy, November. I. _OSullivan
      Rua to the Curlew._ Reprinted, under the title
      _Hanrahan reproves the Curlew_, in _The Wind Among
      the Reeds_, 1899. Also in the _Collected Works_, Vol.
      I. II. _Out of the Old Days._ Reprinted, under the
      title _To my Heart, bidding it have no Fear_, in _The
      Wind Among the Reeds_, 1899. Also in the _Collected
      Works_, Vol. I.

    _The Tables of the Law._ The Savoy, November.
      Reprinted in book form, 1897 and 1904. Also in the
      _Collected Works_, Vol. VII.

    _The Cradles of Gold._ (A story.) The Senate, Nov.

    [William Morriss] _The Well at the Worlds End._ (A
      review.) The Bookman, November.

    _Miss Fiona Macleod as a Poet._ (Review of _From the
      Hills of Dream_.) The Bookman, December.

    _The Death of OSullivan the Red._ The New Review,
      December. Reprinted, under the title _The Death of
      Hanrahan the Red_, in _The Secret Rose_, 1897.

    _Costello the Proud, Oona MacDermott and the Bitter
      Tongue._ The Pageant, 1896. Reprinted in _The
      Secret Rose_, 1897. Also in the _Collected Works_,
      Vol. VII.




1897.


    [Sir Charles Gavan Duffys] _Young Ireland._ (A
      review.) The Bookman, January.

    _The Valley of Lovers._ The Saturday Review, Jan. 9.
      Reprinted, under the title _Aedh tells of a Valley
      full of Lovers_, in _The Wind Among the Reeds_, 1899.
      Also in the _Collected Works_, Vol. I.

    _John OLeary._ (Review of John OLearys
      _Recollections of Fenians and Fenianism_.) The
      Bookman, Feb.

    _Mr. Arthur Symonss New Book._ (Review of _Amoris
      Victima_.) The Bookman, April.

    _The Blessed._ The Yellow Book, April. Reprinted
      in _The Wind Among the Reeds_, 1899. Also in the
      _Collected Works_, Vol. I.

    _Miss Fiona Macleod._ (Review of _Spiritual Tales_,
      _Tragic Romances_ and _Barbaric Tales_.) The
      Sketch, April 28.

    _Robert Bridges._ The Bookman, June. Reprinted, under
      the title _The Return of Ulysses_, in _Ideas of Good
      and Evil_, 1903. Also in the _Collected Works_, Vol.
      VI.

    _The Desire of Man and of Woman._ The Dome, June.
      Reprinted, under the title _Mongan Laments the Change
      that has come upon him and his Beloved_, in _The
      Wind Among the Reeds_, 1899. Also in the _Collected
      Works_, Vol. I.

    _William Blake._ The Academy, June 19. Reprinted,
      under the title _William Blake and the Imagination_,
      in _Ideas of Good and Evil_, 1903. Also in the
      _Collected Works_, Vol. VI.

    [Maurice Maeterlincks] _The Treasure of the Humble._
      (A review.) The Bookman, July.

    _Song._ The Saturday Review, July 24. Reprinted,
      under the title _The Poet pleads with his Friend for
      old Friends_, in _The Wind Among the Reeds_, 1899.
      Also in the _Collected Works_, Vol. I.

    _Mr. Standish OGradys Flight of the Eagle._ (A
      review.) The Bookman, August.

    _OSullivan the Red upon his Wanderings._ The New
      Review, August. Reprinted, under the title _Hanrahan
      Laments because of his Wanderings_, in _The Wind
      Among the Reeds_, 1899. Also, under the title _Maid
      Quiet_, in the _Collected Works_, Vol. I.

    [Maurice Maeterlincks] _Aglavaine and Selysette._ (A
      review.) The Bookman, September.

    _The Tribes of Danu._ The New Review, November.
      Reprinted in part, under the title _The Friends of
      the People of Faery_, in _The Celtic Twilight_, 1902.
      Also in the _Collected Works_, Vol. V.

    _Three Irish Poets._ (A.E., Nora Hopper and Lionel
      Johnson.) A Celtic Christmas, December. (Christmas
      number of _The Irish Homestead_.)




1898.


    _The Prisoners of the Gods._ The Nineteenth Century,
      January.

    _Mr. Lionel Johnsons Poems._ (Review of _Ireland; and
      other poems_.) The Bookman, February.

    _Mr. Rhys Welsh Ballads._ (A review.) The Bookman,
      April.

    _The Broken Gates of Death._ The Fortnightly Review,
      April.

    _Aodh to Dectora. Three Songs._ The Dome, May.
      Reprinted, under the titles _Aedh hears the Cry of
      the Sedge, Aedh Laments the Loss of Love_, and _Aedh
      thinks of those who have spoken Evil of his Beloved_,
      in _The Wind Among the Reeds_, 1899. Also in the
      _Collected Works_, Vol. I.

    _The Celtic Element in Literature._ Cosmopolis, June.
      Reprinted in _Ideas of Good and Evil_, 1903. Also in
      the _Collected Works_, Vol. VI.

    _Mr. Lionel Johnson and Certain Irish Poets._ The
      Daily Express (Dublin), August 27. Reprinted, under
      the title _Lionel Johnson_, in _A Treasury of Irish
      Poetry_, 1900. Also in the _Collected Works_, Vol.
      VIII.

    _Celtic Beliefs about the Soul._ (Review of _The
      Voyage of Bran_ by Kuno Meyer and Alfred Nutt.) The
      Bookman, September.

    _The Poetry of A. E._ The Daily Express (Dublin),
      September 3. Reprinted, under the title _A.E._, in
      _A Treasure of Irish Poetry_, 1900.

    _The Poems and Stories of Miss Nora Hopper._ The
      Daily Express (Dublin), September 24. Reprinted in
      part, under the title _A Note on National Drama_,
      in _Literary Ideals in Ireland_, 1899; and in part,
      under the title _Nora Hopper_, in _A Treasury of
      Irish Poetry_, 1900.

    _Song of Mongan._ The Dome, October. Reprinted, under
      the title _Mongan thinks of his past Greatness_,
      in _The Wind Among the Reeds_, 1899. Also in the
      _Collected Works_, Vol. I.

    _Rosa Alchemica._ (French Translation.) Le Mercure de
      France, October.

    _John Eglinton and Spiritual Art._ The Daily Express
      (Dublin), October, 29. Reprinted in _Literary Ideals
      in Ireland_, 1899.

    _A Symbolic Artist and the Coming of Symbolic Art._
      The Dome, December.

    _Aodh Pleads with the Elemental Powers._ The Dome,
      December. Reprinted in _The Wind Among the Reeds_,
      1899. Also in the _Collected Works_, Vol. I.

    _Bressel the Fisherman._ The Cornish Magazine, Dec.
      Reprinted in _The Wind Among the Reeds_, 1899. Also
      in the _Collected Works_, Vol. I.

    _The Autumn of the Flesh._ The Daily Express
      (Dublin), December 3. Reprinted in _Literary Ideals
      in Ireland_, 1899. Also under the title _The Autumn
      of the Body_ in _Ideas of Good and Evil_, 1903; and
      in the _Collected Works_, Vol. VI.




1899.


    _The Irish Literary Theatre._ The Daily Express
      (Dublin), Jan. 14. Reprinted in part, under the title
      _Plans and Methods_, in Beltaine, May, 1899.

    _Mr. Moore, Mr. Archer and the Literary Theatre._
      (A letter, dated January 27, 1899.) The Daily
      Chronicle, January 30.

    _The Academic Class and the Agrarian Revolution._ The
      Daily Express (Dublin), March 11.

    _The Theatre._ The Dome, April. Reprinted in
      Beltaine, May, 1899. Also in _Ideas of Good and
      Evil_, 1903; and in the _Collected Works_, Vol. VI.

    _Plans and Methods._ Beltaine, May.

    _The Irish Literary Theatre._ Literature, May 6.

    _The Countess Cathleen and Cardinal Logue._ (A letter.)
      The Morning Leader, May 13.

    [Fiona Macleods] _The Dominion of Dreams._ (A review.)
      The Bookman, July.

    _Ireland Bewitched._ The Contemporary Review,
      September.

    _Dust hath closed Helens Eye._ The Dome, October.
      Reprinted in _The Celtic Twilight_, 1902. Also in the
      _Collected Works_, Vol. V.

    _The Literary Movement in Ireland._ The North American
      Review, December. Reprinted in _Ideals in Ireland_,
      1901.




1900.


    _The Irish Literary Theatre_, 1900. The Dome, Jan.
      Reprinted in Beltaine, February, 1900. A paragraph
      is also reprinted, as part of the essay _The
      Theatre_, in _Ideas of Good and Evil_, 1903; and in
      the _Collected Works_, Vol. VI.

    _Plans and Methods._ Beltaine, February.

    _Maive and Certain Irish Beliefs._ Beltaine, Feb.

    _The Symbolism of Poetry._ The Dome, April. Reprinted
      in _Ideas of Good and Evil_, 1903. Also in the
      _Collected Works_, Vol. VI.

    _The Last Feast of the Fianna, Maive, and The
      Bending of the Bough in Dublin._ Beltaine, April.

    _The Way of Wisdom._ The Speaker, April 14.
      Reprinted, under the title _The Pathway_, in the
      _Collected Works_, Vol. VIII.

    _The Shadowy Waters._ The North American Review, May.
      Reprinted in book form, 1900. A new version of the
      play is printed in _Poems_, 1899-1905; and in the
      _Collected Works_, Vol. II.; and an acting version in
      book form, 1907, and in the _Collected Works_, Vol.
      II.

    _The Philosophy of Shelleys Poetry._ The Dome, July.
      Reprinted in _Ideas of Good and Evil_, 1903. Also in
      the _Collected Works_, Vol. VI.

    _The Freedom of the Press in Ireland._ (A letter.) The
      Speaker, July 7.

    _Irish Fairy Beliefs._ (A review of Daniel Deenys
      _Peasant Lore from Gaelic Ireland_.) The Speaker,
      July 14.

    _Irish Language and Irish Literature._ (A letter.) The
      Leader, September 1.

    _Irish Witch Doctors._ The Fortnightly Review, Sept.

    _Introduction to a Dramatic Poem._ The Speaker.
      December 1. Reprinted without title in _The Shadowy
      Waters_, 1900. Also in _Poems_, 1899-1905; and in the
      _Collected Works_, Vol. II.




1901.


    _Cantilation._ (A letter.) The Saturday Review, March
      16.

    _At Stratford-on-Avon._ The Speaker, May 11 and 18.
      Reprinted, with one chapter omitted, in _Ideas of
      Good and Evil_, 1903. Also in the _Collected Works_,
      Vol. VI.

    _The Fool of Faery._ The Kensington, June. Reprinted,
      under the title _The Queen and the Fool_, in _The
      Celtic Twilight_, 1902. Also in the _Collected
      Works_, Vol. V.

    _Under the Moon._ The Speaker, June 15. Reprinted
      in _In the Seven Woods_, 1903. Also in _Poems_,
      1899-1905; and in the _Collected Works_, Vol. I.

    _Ireland and the Arts._ The United Irishman, Aug. 31.
      Reprinted in _Ideas of Good and Evil_, 1903. Also in
      the _Collected Works_, Vol. VI.

    _Magic._ The Monthly Review, September. Reprinted
      in _Ideas of Good and Evil_, 1903. Also in the
      _Collected Works_, Vol. VI.

    _Windlestraws._ Samhain, October. Reprinted in _The
      Irish Dramatic Movement_, _Collected Works_, Vol. IV.




1902.


    _The Blood Bond._ (From _Grania_ by George Moore and W.
      B. Yeats.) A Broad Sheet, January.

    _Spinning Song._ A Broad Sheet, January.

    _The Folly of Being Comforted._ The Speaker, Jan.
      11. Reprinted in _In the Seven Woods_, 1903. Also in
      _Poems_, 1899-1905; and in the _Collected Works_,
      Vol. I.

    _New Chapters in the Celtic Twilight._ I. _Enchanted
      Woods._ The Speaker, January 18. Reprinted in
      _The Celtic Twilight_, 1902. Also in the _Collected
      Works_, Vol. V.

    _Egyptian Plays._ (A note on the performance of _The
      Beloved of Hathor_ and _The Shrine of the Golden
      Hawk_ by Florence Farr and O. Shakespear.) The
      Star, January 23.

    _New Chapters in the Celtic Twilight._ II. _Happy
      and Unhappy Theologians._ The Speaker, Feb. 15.
      Reprinted in _The Celtic Twilight_, 1902. Also in the
      _Collected Works_, Vol. V.

    _What is Popular Poetry?_ The Cornhill Magazine,
      March. Reprinted in _Ideas of Good and Evil_, 1903.
      Also in the _Collected Works_, Vol. VI.

    _The Purcell Society._ (A letter.) The Saturday
      Review, March 8.

    _New Chapters in the Celtic Twilight._ III. _The
      Old Town._ IV. _War._ V. _Earth, Fire and Water._
      The Speaker, March 15. Reprinted in _The Celtic
      Twilight_, 1902. Also in the _Collected Works_, Vol.
      V.

    _Away._ The Fortnightly Review, April.

    _The Acting at St. Teresas Hall._ (Notes on the
      performance of _Deirdre_ by A.E., and of _Cathleen ni
      Hoolihan_.) The United Irishman, April 12 and 19.

    _New Chapters in the Celtic Twilight._ V. _A Voice._
      VI. _The Swine of the Gods._ VII. _The Devil._
      VIII. _And Fair Fierce Women._ IX. _Mortal Help._
      The Speaker, April 19. Reprinted in _The Celtic
      Twilight_, 1902. Also in the _Collected Works_, Vol.
      V.

    _New Chapters in the Celtic Twilight._ X. _Aristotle
      of the Books._ XI. _Miraculous Creatures._ XII.
      _An Enduring Heart._ The Speaker, April 26.
      Reprinted in _The Celtic Twilight_, 1902. Also in the
      _Collected Works_, Vol. V.

    _Speaking to the Psaltery._ The Monthly Review, May.
      Reprinted in _Ideas of Good and Evil_, 1903. Also in
      the _Collected Works_, Vol. VI.

    _Speaking to Musical Notes._ (A letter.) The Academy,
      June 7.

    _Baile and Aillinn._ The Monthly Review, July.
      Reprinted in _In the Seven Woods_, 1903. Also in
      _Poems_, 1899-1905; and in the _Collected Works_,
      Vol. I.

    _Notes._ Samhain, October. Reprinted in _The Irish
      Dramatic Movement_, _Collected Works_, Vol. IV.

    _Cathleen-ni-Hoolihan._ Samhain, October. Reprinted
      in book form, 1902. Also in _Plays for an Irish
      Theatre_, Vol. II., 1904; and in the _Collected
      Works_, Vol. IV.

    _The Freedom of the Theatre._ The United Irishman,
      November 1.

    _Adams Curse._ The Monthly Review, December.
      Reprinted in _In the Seven Woods_, 1903. Also in
      _Poems_, 1899-1905; and in the _Collected Works_,
      Vol. I.




1903.


    _The Old Men admiring themselves in the Water._ The
      Pall Mall Magazine, January. Reprinted in _In the
      Seven Woods_, 1903. Also in _Poems_, 1899-1905; and
      in the _Collected Works_, Vol. I.

    _The Happiest of the Poets._ The Fortnightly Review,
      March. Reprinted in _Ideas of Good and Evil_, 1903.
      Also in the _Collected Works_, Vol. VI.

    _Poets and Dreamers._ The New Liberal Review, March.
      Reprinted, under the title _The Galway Plains_,
      in _Ideas of Good and Evil_, 1903. Also in the
      _Collected Works_, Vol. VI.

    _The Old Age of Queen Maeve._ The Fortnightly Review,
      April. Reprinted in _In the Seven Woods_, 1903. Also
      in _Poems_, 1899-1905; and in the _Collected Works_,
      Vol. I.

    _Cathleen, the Daughter of Hoolihan._ A Broad Sheet,
      April. Reprinted, under the title _The Song of Red
      Hanrahan_, in _In the Seven Woods_, 1903. Also in
      _Poems_, 1899-1905; and in the _Collected Works_,
      Vol. I.

    _The Reform of the Theatre._ The United Irishman,
      April 4. Reprinted, with additions, in Samhain,
      September, 1903. Also in _The Irish Dramatic
      Movement_, _Collected Works_, Vol. IV.

    _Irish Plays and Players._ (A letter.) The Academy,
      May 16.

    _The Happy Townland._ The Weekly Critical Review,
      June. Reprinted, under the title _The Rider from the
      North_, in _In the Seven Woods_, 1903. Also, under
      original title, in _Poems_, 1899-1905; and in the
      _Collected Works_, Vol. I.

    _The Hour-Glass. A Morality._ The North American
      Review, September. Reprinted separately, for
      copyright purposes, in 1903. Also in _Plays for
      an Irish Theatre_, Vol. III., 1904; and in the
      _Collected Works_, Vol. IV.

    _Notes._ Samhain, September. Reprinted in _The Irish
      Dramatic Movement_, _Collected Works_, Vol. IV.

    _A Prologue._ The United Irishman, September 9.
      Reprinted in _Plays for an Irish Theatre_, Vol. III.,
      1904. Also in the _Collected Works_, Vol. VIII.

    _Flaubert and the National Library._ (A letter.) _The
      Irish Times_, October 8.

    _An Irish National Theatre._ The United Irishman,
      October 10. Reprinted in _The Irish Dramatic
      Movement_, _Collected Works_, Vol. IV.

    _The Theatre, the Pulpit and the Newspapers._ The
      United Irishman, October 17. Reprinted in _The Irish
      Dramatic Movement_, _Collected Works_, Vol. IV.

    _The Irish National Theatre and Three Sorts of
      Ignorance._ The United Irishman, October 24.

    _Dream of the Worlds End._ The Green Sheaf, No.
      II.[K]

    _Red Hanrahan._ The Independent Review, Dec.
      Reprinted in _Stories of Red Hanrahan_, 1904. Also in
      the _Collected Works_, Vol. V.




1904.


    _The Dramatic Movement._

    _First Principles._

    _The Play, the Player and the Scene._ Samhain,
      Dec. Reprinted in _The Irish Dramatic Movement_,
      _Collected Works_, Vol. IV.




1905.


    [J. M. Synges] _The Shadow of the Glen._ (Three
      letters.) The United Irishman, January 28, February
      4 and 11.

    _Red Hanrahans Vision._ McClure Magazine, March.
      Reprinted in _Stories of Red Hanrahan_, 1904. Also in
      the _Collected Works_, Vol. V.

    _America and the Arts._ The Metropolitan Magazine,
      April.

    _Trois Pomes d Amour. Les Chevaux de lombre. Le
      Travail de la Passion. OSullivan Rua  Marie
      Lavell._ (French translations by Stuart Merrill.)
      _Vers et Prose_, MarchMay.

    _Queen Edaine._ McClures Magazine, September.
      Reprinted with an additional verse in The Shanachie
      [No. I., Spring, 1906.] Also in _Poems_, 1899-1905;
      _Deirdre_, 1907; and in the _Collected Works_, Vol.
      II.

    _Do not love too long._ The Acorn, October. Reprinted
      in the _Collected Works_, Vol. I.

    _Notes and Opinions._ Samhain, November. Reprinted
      in _The Irish Dramatic Movement_, _Collected Works_,
      Vol. IV.

    _Never Give All the Heart._ McClures Magazine,
      December. Reprinted in _Poems_, 1899-1905; and in the
      _Collected Works_, Vol. I.




1906.


    _Against Witchcraft._ The Shanachie, Spring.
      Reprinted in _On Bailes Strand_, in _Poems_,
      1899-1905. Also in the _Collected Works_, Vol. II.

    _The Praise of Deirdre._ The Shanachie, Spring. See
      _Queen Edaine_, above. (1905.)

    _My Thoughts and My Second Thoughts. I.-X._ The
      Gentlemans Magazine, September and October.
      Reprinted in _Discoveries_, 1907. Also in the
      _Collected Works_, Vol. VIII.

    _Literature and the Living Voice._ The Contemporary
      Review, October. Reprinted in Samhain, 1906. Also
      in _The Irish Dramatic Movement_, _Collected Works_,
      Vol. IV.

    _The Seasons Work._ The Arrow, October 20.
      Reprinted, in part, in _The Irish Dramatic Movement_,
      _Collected Works_, Vol. IV.

    _A Note on The Mineral Workers, and other Notes._
      The Arrow, October 20.

    _My Thoughts and My Second Thoughts. XI.-XVII._ The
      Gentlemans Magazine, November. Reprinted in
      _Discoveries_, 1907. Also in the _Collected Works_,
      Vol. VIII.

    _Notes._

    _Notes on Deirdre_ and _The Shadowy Waters_. The
      Arrow, November 24.

    _Notes._ Samhain, December.




1907.


    _The Controversy over The Playboy._

    _Mr. Yeats Opening Speech at the Debate on February
      4th, at the Abbey Theatre._ The Arrow, February
      23. Both reprinted, in part, in _The Irish Dramatic
      Movement_, _Collected Works_, Vol. IV.

    _Notes._ The Arrow, June 1. Reprinted in part, under
      the title _On Bringing The Playboy to London_, in
      _The Irish Dramatic Movement_, _Collected Works_,
      Vol. IV.

    _Discoveries._ The Shanachie, October. Reprinted in
      _Discoveries_, 1907. Also in the _Collected Works_,
      Vol. VIII.




1908.


    _A Dream._ (A poem, with a note in prose.) The
      Nation, July 11.




PART IV.

AMERICAN EDITIONS.

(COMPILED BY JOHN QUINN.)




[1892.]


The | Countess Kathleen | And Various Legends and Lyrics. | By | W. B.
Yeats. | [Quotation, four lines] | Cameo Series | Boston: Roberts Bros.
| London: T. Fisher Unwin.

Identical with English edition except for title-page and publishers
name on back of binding and absence of publishers device on back cover.




1894.


The | Land of Hearts Desire | By | W. B. Yeats | [publishers
monogram] | Chicago | Stone & Kimball | Caxton Building | MDCCCXCIV

Fcp. 8vo, pp. iv and 46. Grey boards with label. The frontispiece is by
Aubrey Beardsley, the design being the same as that used in the English
edition.


1903. Moshers first edition.

The Land of Hearts Desire | By | W. B. Yeats | O Rose, thou art sick.
| William Blake.

Sm. 4to. This is No. 6 of Vol. IX. of _The Bibelot_, issued in June,
1903. Grey paper cover.

The Land of Hearts Desire | By W. B. Yeats | [ornament] | Portland
Maine | Privately Printed | MDCCCCIII

Fcp. 8vo, pp. xvi and 32. Japan paper cover.

Only 32 copies were printed, during July, 1903.

The Land of Hearts | Desire by William | Butler Yeats | [monogram] |
Portland Maine | Thomas B. Mosher | MDCCCCIII

Sm. 8vo, pp. vi and 36. White parchment paper.

Of this first edition 950 copies were printed on Van Gelder paper, 100
on Japan paper and 10 on pure vellum. Published in October, 1903. Later
editions, each consisting of 950 copies on Van Gelder paper, are bound
in grey boards with paper label.

The Celtic Twilight. | Men and Women, Dhouls and | Faeries. | By W. B.
Yeats. | With a frontispiece by J. B. Yeats. | New York: | Macmillan
and Co. | and London. | 1894

English sheets, with new title-page.




1895.


Poems.

Copies of the English edition were imported by Copeland and Day of
Boston, whose name appears on the title-page and binding of all copies.




1897.


The Secret Rose: | By W. B. Yeats, with | Illustrations by J. B.
| Yeats. | [monogram] | New York: Dodd, Mead & Company | London:
Lawrence and Bullen, Ltd. | MDCCCXCVII.

These copies for the American market are copies of the first English
edition, with the original title-page torn out after the book was
bound, and the above new title-page pasted in.




1899.


The Wind | Among the Reeds | By | W. B. Yeats | [ornament] | John Lane:
The Bodley Head | New York and London | 1899

Cr. 8vo, pp. viii and 110. Cloth.

The English edition was printed from duplicate plates and is identical
except for imprint on title-page and the cutting out of copyright
notice and imprint on verso of title-page (p. [iv]) and the imprint at
end (p. [109]).

Later American editions have separate copyright notice on verso of
title-page dated 1905 but are printed from the same plates and contain
no additional lines.




1901.


The Shadowy Waters | By | W. B. Yeats | [ornament] | New York | Dodd,
Mead and Company | 1901

Cr. 4to, pp. 62. Grey boards with side label.




1902.


Where There is | Nothing | A Drama | In Five Acts | By | W. B. Yeats;
John Lane | MCMII

Cr. 8vo, pp. viii and 100. Issued in grey paper cover, the first page
printed from the types of the title-page.

Fifteen copies printed for copyright of which not over eight are now
known. Printed for Mr. John Quinn from the authors first draft and
contains some errors corrected in the large-paper edition.


1902. Second Edition.

Printed for Mr. John Quinn from the same types as the preceding, but
without the publishers name on title-page and without imprint on verso
of title-page below copyright, and with some errors corrected. On the
reverse of the half-title is the notice Thirty copies printed | from
the type, of which | this is No.________

Large-paper copies (9-9/16ths by 5-7/16ths inches). Pale green boards
with labels on front and back.

These two editions contain a dedication to Lady Gregory, dated
September 19, 1902, which does not appear in any subsequent edition.


1903. Third Edition.

Where There is | Nothing | Being Volume One of Plays for | an Irish
Theatre | By | W. B. Yeats | New York | The Macmillan Company |
London: Macmillan & Co., Ltd. | 1903 | All rights reserved

Globe 8vo, pp. 216. Cloth.

This edition was considerably revised and contains some new passages.
The new dedication to Lady Gregory is dated February, 1903.

Also a large-paper edition, printed on Japan paper, and limited to 100
copies.


The Celtic Twilight. Revised and enlarged edition of 1902.

The English sheets were imported and bound in America, back of cover
being lettered The Celtic | Twilight | W. B. Yeats. | The Macmillan |
Company




1903.


Ideas of Good and | Evil. By W. B. Yeats | The Macmillan Company | New
York. MCMIII

English sheets with new title-page as above.


In the Seven Woods | Being Poems Chiefly of the | Irish Heroic Age | By
| W. B. Yeats | New York | The Macmillan Company | London: Macmillan &
Co., Ltd. | 1903 | All rights reserved

Cr. 8vo, pp. vi and 90. Cloth.




1904.


The Hour-Glass | And Other Plays | Being Volume Two of Plays for | An
Irish Theatre | By | W. B. Yeats | New York | The Macmillan Company |
London: Macmillan & Co., Ltd. | 1904 | All rights reserved

Globe 8vo, pp. viii and 116. Cloth.[L]

Also a large-paper edition, limited to 100 copies.

These American editions do not contain the bars of music or the Note
on the Music of the English edition.


The Kings Threshold | A Play in Verse | By | W. B. Yeats | New York |
Printed for Private Circulation | 1904

Medium 8vo, pp. x and 58. Grey boards.

Printed on cream-coloured old hand-made Italian paper, 100 copies only,
for Mr. John Quinn.




1906.


The Poetical Works | of | William B. Yeats | In Two Volumes | Volume I
| Lyrical Poems | New York | The Macmillan Company | London: Macmillan
& Co., Ltd. | 1906 | All rights reserved

Cr. 8vo, pp. xiv and 340. Cloth.


CONTENTS.

    _Preface._ [Dated _In the Seven Woods_, July, 1906.]

    _Early Poems: I. Ballads and Lyrics._

    _Early Poems: II. The Wanderings of Oisin._

    _Early Poems: III. The Rose._

    _The Wind Among the Reeds._

    _In the Seven Woods._

    _The Old Age of Queen Maeve._

    _Baile and Aillinn._




1907.


The Poetical Works | of | William B. Yeats | In Two Volumes | Volume
II | Dramatical Poems | New York | The Macmillan Company | London:
Macmillan & Co., Ltd. | 1907 | All rights reserved

Cr. 8vo, pp. x and 528.


CONTENTS.

    _Preface._ [Dated December, 1906.]

    _The Countess Cathleen._

    _The Land of Hearts Desire._

    _The Shadowy Waters._ [New version.]

    _On Bailes Strand._ [New version.]

    _The Kings Threshold._ [New version.]

    _Deirdre._

    _Appendix I_: The Legendary and Mythological Foundation
      of the Plays and Poems.

    _Appendix II_: The Dates and Places of Performance of
      the Plays.

    _Appendix III_: _Acting Version of The Shadowy
      Waters._

    _Appendix IV_: The Work of the National Theatre
      Society at the Abbey Theatre, Dublin: A Statement of
      Principles.

These two volumes form the first collected edition of the authors
verse, lyric and dramatic. It is to Americas credit that this first
collected edition appeared in America.




1908.


The Unicorn from | the Stars | and Other Plays | By | William B. Yeats
| and | Lady Gregory | New York | The Macmillan Company | 1908 | All
rights reserved

Cr. 8vo, pp. xiv and 210. Cloth.


CONTENTS.

    _The Unicorn from the Stars._ By Lady Gregory and W. B.
      Yeats.

    _Cathleen ni Hoolihan._

    _The Hour-Glass: A Morality._

The Golden Helmet | By | William Butler Yeats | Published | By | John
Quinn | New York 1908

Fcp. 8vo, pp. viii and 34. Grey boards with label.

Fifty copies only printed.


NOTE.

Of the first separate edition of _The Hour-Glass_, described in Part I.
under date 1903, only twelve copies were printed. Of these, six went
for English copyright, two were lost in the post, the printer kept one,
one belongs to Mr. W. B. Yeats, one to Lady Gregory and one to Mr. John
Quinn.

The essay _Modern Irish Poetry_, which appeared as an Introduction to
_A Book of Irish Verse_, London, 1895 (see Part II.), was reissued with
additions in _Irish Literature_, Vol. III., Philadelphia, 1904.


    THE END.




    _Printed by_ A. H. BULLEN, _at The Shakespeare Head Press,
                       Stratford-on-Avon._

       *       *       *       *       *

FOOTNOTES:

[A] _Poems of Spenser: Selected and with an Introduction by W. B.
Yeats._ (T. C. and E. C. Jack, Edinburgh, N.D.)

[B] Rose Kavanagh, the poet, wrote to her religious adviser from, I
think, Leitrim, where she lived, and asked him to get her the works of
Mazzini. He replied, You must mean Manzone.

[C] I have heard him say more than once, I will not say our people
know good from bad, but I will say that they dont hate the good when
it is pointed out to them as a great many people do in England.

[D] A small political organizer told me once that he and a certain
friend got together somewhere in Tipperary a great meeting of farmers
for OLeary on his coming out of prison, and OLeary had said at it:
The landlords gave us some few leaders, and I like them for that, and
the artisans have given us great numbers of good patriots, and so I
like them best: but you I do not like at all, for you have never given
us any one. I have known but one that had his moral courage, and that
was a woman with beauty, to give her courage and self-possession.

[E] This version, though Dr. Hyde went some way with it, has never been
published. I do not know why.W.B.Y., _March, 1908_.

[F] Reprinted from _The Wanderings of Oisin_, 1889.

[G] Reprinted from _The Countess Cathleen_, 1892.

[H] Written for the first production of _The Kings Threshold_ in
Dublin, but not used, as, owing to the smallness of the company, nobody
could be spared to speak it.W.B.Y., 1904.

[I] Reprinted from _The Shadowy Waters_, 1900.

[J] Reprinted from _In the Seven Woods_, 1903.

[K] The Green Sheaf, No. IV., published as a supplement a
reproduction of a pastel by Mr. Yeats, _The Lake at Coole_.

[L] _The Pot of Broth_, contained in this volume, originally appeared
in _The Gael_, (an American Monthly Magazine, printed in New York,
partly in Irish and partly in English,) September, 1903.

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcribers Notes:

Obvious punctuation errors repaired. Superscripted fractions are
shown

Page 23, he changed to be (may be greater)

Page 35, maybe changed to may be (it may be, generations)

Page 236, p. changed to pp. (_Ghosts_, pp. 128-129)

Page 247, esssay changed to essay (essay originally appeared)

The Project Gutenberg eBook of The Complete Poems of Sir Thomas Moore

This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The Complete Poems of Sir Thomas Moore

Author: Thomas Moore

Commentator: William Michael Rossetti

Release date: May 1, 2005 [eBook #8187]
                Most recently updated: December 26, 2020

Language: English

Credits: E-text produced by Charles Aldarondo, Tiffany Vergon, Robert Connal, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE COMPLETE POEMS OF SIR THOMAS MOORE ***




E-text produced by Charles Aldarondo, Tiffany Vergon, Robert Connal, and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team



THE COMPLETE POEMS OF SIR THOMAS MOORE

COLLECTED BY HIMSELF

WITH EXPLANATORY NOTES




WITH A BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

BY WILLIAM M. ROSSETTI







THOMAS MOORE


Thomas Moore was born in Dublin on the 28th of May 1780. Both his parents
were Roman-Catholics; and he was, as a matter of course, brought up in the
same religion, and adhered to it--not perhaps with any extreme
zeal--throughout his life. His father was a decent tradesman, a grocer and
spirit-retailer--or "spirit-grocer," as the business is termed in Ireland.
Thomas received his schooling from Mr. Samuel Whyte, who had been
Sheridan's first preceptor, a man of more than average literary culture.
He encouraged a taste for acting among the boys: and Moore, naturally
intelligent and lively, became a favorite with his master, and a leader in
the dramatic recreations.

His aptitude for verse appeared at an early age. In 1790 he composed an
epilogue to a piece acted at the house of Lady Borrows, in Dublin; and in
his fourteenth year he wrote a sonnet to Mr. Whyte, which was published in
a Dublin magazine.

Like other Irish Roman-Catholics, galled by the hard and stiff collar of
Protestant ascendancy, the parents of Thomas Moore hailed the French
Revolution, and the prospects which it seemed to offer of some reflex
ameliorations. In 1792 the lad was taken by his father to a dinner in
honor of the Revolution; and he was soon launched upon a current of ideas
and associations which might have conducted a person of more
self-oblivious patriotism to the scaffold on which perished the friend of
his opening manhood, Robert Emmet. Trinity College, Dublin, having been
opened to Catholics by the Irish Parliament in 1793, Moore was entered
there as a student in the succeeding year. He became more proficient in
French and Italian than in the classic languages, and showed no turn for
Latin verses. Eventually, his political proclivities, and intimacy with
many of the chiefs of opposition, drew down upon him (after various
interrogations, in which he honorably refused to implicate his friends) a
severe admonition from the University authorities; but he had not joined
in any distinctly rebellious act and no more formidable results ensued to
him.

In 1793 Moore published in the _Anthologia Hibernica_ two pieces of verse;
and his budding talents became so far known as to earn him the proud
eminence of Laureate to the Gastronomic Club of Dalkey, near Dublin, in
1794. Through his acquaintance with Emmet, he joined the Oratorical
Society, and afterwards the more important Historical Society; and he
published _An Ode on Nothing, with Notes, by Trismegistus Rustifucius, D.
D._, which won a party success. About the same time he wrote articles for
_The Press_, a paper founded towards the end of 1797 by O'Connor, Addis,
Emmet, and others. He graduated at Trinity College in November, 1799.

The bar was the career which his parents, and especially his mother,
wished Thomas to pursue; neither of them had much faith in poetry or
literature as a resource for his subsistence. Accordingly, in 1799, he
crossed over into England, and studied in the Middle Temple; and he was
afterwards called to the bar, but literary pursuits withheld him from
practicing. He had brought with him from Ireland his translations from
Anacreon; and published these by subscription in 1800, dedicated to the
Prince Regent (then the illusory hope of political reformers), with no
inconsiderable success. Lord Moira, Lady Donegal, and other leaders of
fashionable society, took him up with friendly warmth, and he soon found
himself a well-accepted guest in the highest circles in London. No clever
young fellow--without any advantage of birth or of person, and with
intellectual attractions which seem to posterity to be of a rather
middling kind--ever won his way more easily or more cheaply into that
paradise of mean ambitions, the _beau monde_. Moore has not escaped
the stigma which attaches to almost all men who thus succeeded under the
like conditions--that of tuft-hunting and lowering compliances. He would
be a bold man who should affirm that there was absolutely no sort of
ground for the charge; or that Moore--fted at Holland House, and
hovered-round by the fashionable of both sexes, the men picking up his
witticisms, and the women languishing over his songs--was capable of the
same sturdy self-reliance and simple adhesion to principle which might
possibly have been in him, and forthcoming from him, under different
conditions. Who shall touch pitch and not be defiled,--who treacle, and
not be sweetened? At the same time, it is easy to carry charges of this
kind too far, and not always through motives the purest and most exalted.
It may be said without unfairness on either side that the sort of talents
which Moore possessed brought him naturally into the society which he
frequented; that very possibly the world has got quite as much out of him
by that development of his faculties as by any other which they could have
been likely to receive; and that he repaid patronage in the coin of
amusement and of bland lenitives, rather than in that of obsequious
adulation. For we are not required nor permitted to suppose that there was
the stuff of a hero in "little Tom Moore;" or that the lapdog of the
drawing-room would under any circumstances have been the wolf-hound of the
public sheepfold. In the drawing-room he is a sleeker lapdog, and lies
upon more and choicelier-clothed laps than he would in "the two-pair
back;" and that is about all that needs to be said or speculated in such a
case. As a matter of fact, the demeanor of Moore among the socially great
seems to have been that of a man who respected his company, without
failing to respect himself also--any ill-natured caviling or ready-made
imputations to the contrary notwithstanding.

In 1802 Moore produced his first volume of original verse, the _Poetical
Works of the late Thomas Little_ (an allusion to the author's remarkably
small stature), for which he received 60. There are in this volume some
erotic improprieties, not of a very serious kind either in intention or in
harmfulness, which Moore regretted in later years. Next year Lord Moira
procured him the post of Registrar to the Admiralty Court of Bermuda; he
embarked on the 25th of September, and reached his destination in January
1804. This work did not suit him much better than the business of the bar;
in March he withdrew from personal discharge of the duties: and, leaving a
substitute in his place, he made a tour in the United States and Canada.
He was presented to Jefferson, and felt impressed by his republican
simplicity. Such a quality, however, was not in Moore's line; and nothing
perhaps shows the essential smallness of his nature more clearly than the
fact that his visit to the United States, in their giant infancy, produced
in him no glow of admiration or aspiration, but only a recrudescence of
the commonest prejudices--the itch for picking little holes, the petty joy
of reporting them, and the puny self-pluming upon fancied or factitious
superiorities. If the washy liberal patriotism of Moore's very early years
had any vitality at all, such as would have qualified it for a harder
struggle than jeering at the Holy Alliance, and singing after-dinner songs
of national sentimentalism to the applause of Whig lords and ladies, this
American experience may beheld to have been its death-blow. He now saw
republicans face to face; and found that they were not for him, nor he for
them. He returned to England in 1806; and soon afterwards published his
_Odes and Epistles_, comprising many remarks, faithfully expressive of his
perceptions, on American society and manners.

The volume was tartly criticised in the _Edinburgh Review_ by Jeffrey, who
made some rather severe comments upon the improprieties chargeable to
Moore's early writings. The consequence was a challenge, and what would
have been a duel at Chalk Farm, but for unloaded pistols and police
interference. This _fiasco_ soon led to an amicable understanding between
Moore and Jeffrey; and a few years later, about the end of 1811, to a
friendship of closer intimacy between the Irish songster and his great
poetic contemporary Lord Byron. His lordship, in his youthful satire of
_English Bards and Scotch Reviewers_, had made fun of the unbloody duel.
This Moore resented, not so much as a mere matter of ridicule as because
it involved an ignoring or a denial of a counter-statement of the matter
put into print by himself. He accordingly wrote a letter to Byron on the
1st of January 1810, calculated to lead to further hostilities. But, as
the noble poet had then already for some months left England for his
prolonged tour on the Continent, the missive did not reach him; and a
little epistolary skirmishing, after his return in the following year,
terminated in a hearty reconciliation, and a very intimate cordiality,
almost deserving of the lofty name of friendship, on both sides.

Re-settled in London, and re-quartered upon the pleasant places of
fashion, Moore was once more a favorite at Holland House, Lansdowne House,
and Donington House, the residence of Lord Moira. His lordship obtained a
comfortable post to soothe the declining years of Moore's father, and held
out to the poet himself the prospect--which was not however realized--of
another snug berth for his own occupancy. The United Kingdom of Great
Britain and Ireland never received the benefit of the Irish patriot's
services in any public capacity at home--only through the hands of a
defaulting deputy in Bermuda: it did, however, at length give him the
money without the official money's-worth, for in 1835, under Lord
Melbourne's ministry, an annual literary pension of 300 was bestowed upon
the then elderly poet. Nor can it be said that Moore's worth to his party,
whether we regard him as political sharpshooter or as national lyrist,
deserved a less recognition from the Whigs: he had at one time, with
creditable independence, refused to be indebted to the Tories for an
appointment. Some obloquy has at times been cast upon him on account of
his sarcasms against the Prince Regent, which, however well merited on
public grounds, have been held to come with an ill grace from the man
whose first literary effort, the _Anacreon_, had been published under the
auspices of his Royal Highness as dedicatee, no doubt a practical
obligation of some moment to the writer. It does not appear, however, that
the obligation went much beyond this simple acceptance of the dedication:
Moore himself declared that the Regent's further civilities had consisted
simply in asking him twice to dinner, and admitting him, in 1811, to a
fte in honor of the regency.

The life of Moore for several years ensuing is one of literary success and
social brilliancy, varied by his marrying in 1811, Miss Bessy Dyke, a lady
who made an excellent and devoted wife, and to whom he was very
affectionately attached, although the attractions and amenities of the
fashionable world caused from time to time considerable inroads upon his
domesticity. After a while, he removed from London, with his wife and
young family, to Mayfield Cottage, near Ashbourne, Derbyshire--a somewhat
lonely site. His _Irish Melodies_, the work by which he will continue best
known, had their origin in 1797, when his attention was drawn to a
publication named _Bunting's Irish Melodies_, for which he occasionally
wrote the words. In 1807 he entered into a definite agreement with Mr.
Power on this subject, in combination with Sir J. Stevenson, who undertook
to compose the accompaniments. The work was prolonged up to the year 1834;
and contributed very materially to Moore's comfort in money matters and
his general prominence--as his own singing of the Melodies in good society
kept up his sentimental and patriotic prestige, and his personal
lionizing, in a remarkable degree. He played on the piano, and sang with
taste, though in a style resembling recitative, and not with any great
power of voice: in speaking, his voice had a certain tendency to
hoarseness, but its quality became flute-like in singing. In 1811 he made
another essay in the musical province; writing, at the request of the
manager of the Lyceum Theatre, an operetta named _M.P., or the
Bluestocking_. It was the reverse of a stage-success; and Moore, in
collecting his poems, excluded this work, save as regards some of the
songs comprised in it. In 1808 had appeared anonymously, the poems of
_Intolerance and Corruption_, followed in 1809 by _The Sceptic_.
_Intercepted Letters, or The Twopenny Postbag, by Thomas Brown the
Younger_, came out in 1812: it was a huge success, and very intelligibly
such, going through fourteen editions in one year. In the same year the
project of writing an oriental poem--a class of work greatly in vogue now
that Byron was inventing Giaours and Corsairs--was seriously entertained
by Moore. This project took shape in _Lalla Rookh_, written chiefly at
Mayfield Cottage--a performance for which Mr. Longman the publisher paid
the extremely large sum of 3150 in advance: its publication hung over
till 1817. The poem has been translated into all sorts of languages,
including Persian, and is said to have found many admirers among its
oriental readers. Whatever may be thought of its poetic merits--and I for
one disclaim any scintilla of enthusiasm--or of its power in vitalizing
the _disjecta membra_ of orientalism, the stock-in-trade of the Asiatic
curiosity-shop, there is no doubt that Moore worked very conscientiously
upon this undertaking: he read up to any extent,--wrote, talked, and
perhaps thought, Islamically--and he trips up his reader with some
allusion verse after verse, tumbling him to the bottom of the page, with
its quagmire of explanatory footnotes. In 1815 appeared the _National
Airs_; in 1816, _Sacred Songs, Duets, and Trios_, the music composed and
selected by Stevenson and Moore; in 1818, _The Fudge Family in Paris_,
again a great hit. This work was composed in Paris, which capital Moore
had been visiting in company with his friend Samuel Rogers the poet.

The easily earned money and easily discharged duties of the appointment in
Bermuda began now to weigh heavy on Moore. Defalcations of his deputy, to
the extent of 6000, were discovered, for which the nominal holder of the
post was liable. Moore declined offers of assistance; and, pending a legal
decision on the matter, he had found it apposite to revisit the Continent.
In France, Lord John (the late Earl) Russell was his travelling companion:
they went on together through Switzerland, and parted at Milan. Moore
then, on the 8th of October 1819, joined in Venice his friend Byron, who
had been absent from England since 1816. The poets met in the best of
humor, and on terms of hearty good-fellowship--Moore staying with Byron
for five or six days. On taking leave of him, Byron presented the Irish
lyrist with the MS. of his autobiographical memoirs stipulating that they
should not be published till after the donor's death: at a later date he
became anxious that they should remain wholly unpublished. Moore sold the
MS. in 1831 to Murray for 2100, after some negotiations with Longman, and
consigned it to the publisher's hands. In 1824 the news arrived of Byron's
death. Mr. (afterwards Sir Wilmot) Horton on the part of Lady Byron, Mr.
Luttrell on that of Moore, Colonel Doyle on that of Mrs. Leigh, Lord
Byron's half-sister, and Mr. Hobhouse (afterwards Lord Broughton) as a
friend and executor of the deceased poet, consulted on the subject.
Hobhouse was strong in urging the suppression of the Memoirs. The result
was that Murray, setting aside considerations of profit, burned the MS.
(some principal portions of which nevertheless exist in print, in other
forms of publication); and Moore immediately afterwards, also in a
disinterested spirit, repaid him the purchase-money of 2100. It was quite
fair that Moore should be reimbursed this large sum by some of the persons
in whose behoof he had made the sacrifice, this was not neglected.

To resume. Bidding adieu to Byron at Venice, Moore went on to Rome with
the sculptor Chantrey and the portrait-painter Jackson. His tour supplied
the materials for the _Rhymes on the Road_, published, as being extracted
from the journal of a travelling member of the Pococurante Society, in
1820, along with the _Fables for the Holy Alliance_. Lawrence, Turner, and
Eastlake, were also much with Moore in Rome: and here he made acquaintance
with Canova. Hence he returned to Paris, and made that city his home up to
1822, expecting the outcome of the Bermuda affair. He also resided partly
at Butte Goaslin, near Svres, with a rich and hospitable Spanish family
named Villamil. The debt of 6000 was eventually reduced to 750: both the
Marquis of Lansdowne and Lord John Russell pressed Moore with their
friendly offers, and the advance which he at last accepted was soon repaid
out of the profits of the _Loves of the Angels_--which poem, chiefly
written in Paris, was published in 1823. The prose tale of _The Epicurean_
was composed about the same time, but did not issue from the press till
1827: the _Memoirs of Captain Rock_ in 1824. He had been under an
engagement to a bookseller to write a _Life of Sheridan_. During his stay
in France the want of documents withheld him from proceeding with this
work: but he ultimately took it up, and brought it out in 1825. It was not
availed to give Moore any reputation as a biographer, though the reader in
search of amusement will pick out of it something to suit him. George the
Fourth is credited with having made a neat _bon mot_ upon this book. Some
one having remarked to him that "Moore had been murdering Sheridan,"--
"No," replied his sacred majesty, "but he has certainly attempted his
life." A later biographical performance, published in 1830, and one of
more enduring interest to posterity, was the _Life of Byron_. This is a
very fascinating book; but more--which is indeed a matter of course--in
virtue of the lavish amount of Byron's own writing which it embodies than,
on account of the Memoir-compiler's doings. However, there is a
considerable share of good feeling in the book, as well as matter of
permanent value from the personal knowledge that Moore had of Byron; and
the avoidance of "posing" and of dealing with the subject for purposes of
effect, in the case of a man whose career and genius lent themselves so
insidiously to such a treatment, is highly creditable to the biographer's
good sense and taste. The _Life of Byron_ succeeded, in the list of
Moore's writings, a _History of Ireland_, contributed in 1827 to
_Lardner's Cyclopaedia_, and the _Travels of an Irishman in Search of a
Religion_, published in the same year: and was followed by a _Life of Lord
Edward Fitzgerald_, issued in 1881. This, supplemented by some minor
productions, closes the sufficiently long list of writings of an
industrious literary life.

In his latter years Moore resided at Sloperton Cottage, near Devizes in
Wiltshire, Where he was near the refined social circle of Lord Lansdowne
at Bowood, as well as the lettered home of the Rev. Mr. Bowles at
Bremhill. Domestic sorrows clouded his otherwise cheerful and comfortable
retirement. One of his sons died in the French military service in
Algeria; another of consumption in 1842. For some years before his own
death, which occurred on the 25th of February 1853, his mental powers had
collapsed. He sleeps in Bromham Cemetery, in the neighborhood of
Sloperton.

Moore had a very fair share of learning, as well as steady application,
greatly as he sacrificed to the graces of life, and especially of "good
society." His face was not perhaps much more impressive in its contour
than his diminutive figure. His eyes, however, were dark and fine; his
forehead bony, and with what a phrenologist would recognize as large bumps
of wit; the mouth pleasingly dimpled. His manner and talk were bright,
abounding rather in lively anecdote and point than in wit and humor,
strictly so called. To term him amiable according to any standard, and
estimable too as men of an unheroic fibre go, is no more than his due.

No doubt the world has already seen the most brilliant days of Moore's
poetry. Its fascinations are manifestly of the more temporary sort: partly
through fleetingness of subject-matter and evanescence of allusion (as in
the clever and still readable satirical poems); partly through the aroma
of sentimental patriotism, hardly strong enough in stamina to make the
compositions national, or to maintain their high level of popularity after
the lyrist himself has long been at rest; partly through the essentially
commonplace sources and forms of inspiration which belong to his more
elaborate and ambitious works. No poetical reader of the present day is
the poorer for knowing absolutely nothing of _Lalla Rookh_ or the _Loves
of the Angels_. What then will be the hold or the claim of these writings
upon a reader of the twenty-first century? If we expect the satirical
compositions, choice in a different way, the best things of Moore are to
be sought in the _Irish Melodies_, to which a considerable share of merit,
and of apposite merit, is not to be denied: yet even here what deserts
around the oases, and the oases themselves how soon exhaustible and
forgettable! There are but few thoroughly beautiful and touching lines in
the whole of Moore's poetry. Here is one--

  "Come rest in this bosom, mine own stricken deer."

A great deal has been said upon the overpowering "lusciousness" of his
poetry, and the magical "melody" of his verse: most of this is futile.
There is in the former as much of _fadeur_ as of lusciousness; and a
certain tripping or trotting exactitude, not less fully reducible to the
test of scansion than of a well-attuned ear, is but a rudimentary form of
melody--while of harmony or rhythmic volume of sound Moore is as
decisively destitute as any correct versifier can well be. No clearer
proof of the incapacity of the mass of critics and readers to appreciate
the calibre of poetical work in point of musical and general execution
could be given than the fact that Moore has always with them passed, and
still passes, for an eminently melodious poet. What then remains? Chiefly
this. In one class of writing, liveliness of witty banter, along with
neatness; and, in the other and ostensibly more permanent class, elegance,
also along with neatness. Reduce these qualities to one denomination, and
we come to something that may be called "Propriety": a sufficiently
disastrous "raw material" for the purposes of a poet, and by no means
loftily to be praised or admired even when regarded as the outer
investiture of a nobler poetic something within. But let desert of every
kind have its place, and welcome. In the cosmical diapason and august
orchestra of poetry, Tom Moore's little Pan's-pipe can at odd moments be
heard, and interjects an appreciable and rightly-combined twiddle or two.
To be gratified with these at the instant is no more than the instrument
justifies, and the executant claims: to think much about them when the
organ is pealing or the violin plaining (with a Shelley performing on the
first, or a Mrs. Browning on the second), or to be on the watch for their
recurrences, would be equally superfluous and weak-minded.






CONTENTS

Advertisement.
After the Battle.
Alarming Intelligence.
Alciphron: a Fragment.
Letter I. From Alciphron at Alexandria to Cleon at Athens.
      II. From the Same to the Same.
     III. From the Same to the Same.
      IV. From Orcus, High Priest of Memphis, to Decius, the Praetorian
          Prefect.
All in the Family Way.
All that's Bright must Fade.
Almighty God.
Alone in Crowds to wander on.
Amatory Colloquy between Bank and Government.
Anacreon, Odes of.
        I. I saw the Smiling Bard of Pleasure.
       II. Give me the Harp of Epic Song.
      III. Listen to the Muse's Lyre.
       IV. Vulcan! hear Your Glorious Task.
        V. Sculptor, wouldst Thou glad my Soul.
       VI. As Late I sought the Spangled Bowers.
      VII. The Women tell Me Every Day.
     VIII. I care not for the Idle State.
       IX. I pray thee, by the Gods Above.
        X. How am I to punish Thee.
       XI. "Tell Me, Gentle Youth, I pray Thee".
      XII. They tell How Atys, Wild with Love.
     XIII. I will, I will, the Conflict's past.
      XIV. Count Me, on the Summer Trees.
       XV. Tell Me, Why, My Sweetest Dove.
      XVI. Thou, Whose Soft and Rosy Hues.
     XVII. And Now with All Thy Pencil's Truth.
    XVIII. Now the Star of Day is High.
      XIX. Here recline You, Gentle Maid.
       XX. One Day the Muses twined the Hands.
      XXI. Observe When Mother Earth is Dry.
     XXII. The Phrygian Rock, That braves the Storm.
    XXIII. I Often wish this Languid Lyre.
     XXIV. To All That breathe the Air of Heaven.
      XXV. Once in Each Revolving Year.
     XXVI. Thy Harp may sing of Troy's Alarms.
    XXVII. We read the Flying Courser's Name.
   XXVIII. As, by His Lemnian Forge's Flame.
     XXIX. Yes--Loving is a Painful Thrill.
      XXX. 'Twas in a Mocking Dream of Night.
     XXXI. Armed with Hyacinthine Rod.
    XXXII. Strew Me a Fragrant Bed of Leaves.
   XXXIII. 'Twas Noon of Night, When round the Pole.
    XXXIV. Oh Thou, of All Creation Blest.
     XXXV. Cupid Once upon a Bed.
    XXXVI. If Hoarded Gold possest the Power.
   XXXVII. 'Twas Night, and Many a Circling Bowl.
  XXXVIII. Let Us drain the Nectared Bowl.
    XXXIX. How I love the Festive Boy.
       XL. I know That Heaven hath sent Me Here.
      XLI. When Spring adorns the Dewy Scene.
     XLII. Yes, be the Glorious Revel Mine.
    XLIII. While Our Rosy Fillets shed.
     XLIV. Buds of Roses, Virgin Flowers.
      XLV. Within This Goblet Rich and Deep.
     XLVI. Behold, the Young, the Rosy Spring.
    XLVII. 'Tis True, My Fading Years decline.
   XLVIII. When My Thirsty Soul I steep.
     XLIX. When Bacchus, Jove's Immortal Boy.
        L. When Wine I quaff, before My Eyes.
       LI. Fly Not Thus My Brow of Snow.
      LII. Away, Away, Ye Men of Rules.
     LIII. When I beheld the Festive Train.
      LIV. Methinks, the Pictured Bull We see.
       LV. While We invoke the Wreathed Spring.
      LVI. He, Who instructs the Youthful Crew.
     LVII. Whose was the Artist Hand That Spread.
    LVIII. When Gold, as Fleet as Zephyr's Pinion.
      LIX. Ripened by the Solar Beam.
       LX. Awake to Life, My Sleeping Shell.
      LXI. Youth's Endearing Charms are fled.
     LXII. Fill Me, Boy, as Deep a Draught.
    LXIII. To Love, the Soft and Blooming Child.
     LXIV. Haste Thee, Nymph, Whose Well-aimed Spear.
      LXV. Like Some Wanton Filly sporting.
     LXVI. To Thee, the Queen of Nymphs Divine.
    LXVII. Rich in Bliss, I proudly scorn.
   LXVIII. Now Neptune's Month Our Sky deforms.
     LXIX. They wove the Lotus Band to deck.
      LXX. A Broken Cake, with Honey Sweet
     LXXI. With Twenty Chords My Lyre is hung.
    LXXII. Fare Thee Well, Perfidious Maid.
   LXXIII. Awhile I bloomed, a Happy Flower.
    LXXIV. Monarch Love, Resistless Boy.
     LXXV. Spirit of Love, Whose Locks unrolled.
    LXXVI. Hither, Gentle Muse of Mine.
   LXXVII. Would That I were a Tuneful Lyre.
  LXXVIII. When Cupid sees How Thickly Now.
           Let Me resign This Wretched Breath.
           I know Thou lovest a Brimming Measure.
           From Dread Lucadia's Frowning Steep.
           Mix Me, Child, a Cup Divine.
Anacreontic.
Anacreontic.
Anacreontic.
Anacreontic.
Anacreontic.
And doth not a Meeting Like This.
Angel of Charity.
Animal Magnetism.
Anne Boleyn.
Announcement of a New Grand Acceleration Company.
Announcement of a New Thalaba.
Annual Pill, The.
Anticipated Meeting of the British Association in the Year 1836.
As a Beam o'er the Face of the Waters may glow.
As down in the Sunless Retreats.
Ask not if Still I Love.
Aspasia.
As Slow our Ship.
As Vanquished Erin.
At Night.
At the Mid Hour of Night.
Avenging and Bright.
Awake, arise, Thy Light is come.
Awful Event.

Ballad, A.
Ballad for the Cambridge Election.
Ballad Stanzas.
Beauty and Song.
Before the Battle.
Behold the Sun.
Believe Me, if All Those Endearing Young Charms.
Black and Blue Eyes.
Blue Love-Song, A.
Boat Glee.
Boy of the Alps, The.
Boy Statesman, The.
Bright be Thy Dreams.
Bright Moon.
Bring the Bright Garlands Hither.
Brunswick Club, The.
But Who shall see.
By that Lake, Whose Gloomy Shore.

Calm be Thy Sleep.
Canadian Boat Song, A.
Canonization of Saint Butterworth, The.
Captain Rock in London.
Case of Libel, A.
Catalogue, The.
Cephalus and Procris.
Characterless, A.
Cherries, The.
Child's Song--From a Masque.
Church Extension.
Cloris and Fanny.
Cocker, on Church Reform.
Come, chase that Starting Tear Away.
Come Not, oh Lord.
Come o'er the Sea.
Come, play Me That Simple Air Again.
Come, rest in This Bosom.
Come, send Round the Wine.
Come, Ye Disconsolate.
Common Sense and Genius.
Consultation, The.
Copy of An Intercepted Despatch.
Corn and Catholics.
Corrected Report of Some Late Speeches, A.
Correspondence between a Lady and Gentleman.
Corruption, an Epistle.
Cotton and Corn.
Country Dance and Quadrille.
Crystal-Hunters, The.
Cupid and Psyche.
Cupid Armed.
Cupid's Lottery.
Curious Fact, A.

Dance of Bishops, The.
Dawn is breaking o'er Us, The.
Day-Dream, The.
Day of Love, The.
Dear Fanny.
Dear Harp of My Country.
Dear? Yes.
Desmond's Song.
Devil among the Scholars, The.
Dialogue between a Sovereign and a One Pound Note.
Dick * * * *.
Did not.
Dog-day Reflections.
Donkey and His Panniers, The.
Do not say That Life is waning.
Dost Thou Remember.
Dream, A.
Dreaming For Ever.
Dream of Antiquity, A.
Dream of Hindostan, A.
Dream of Home, The.
Dream of the Two Sisters, The.
Dream of Those Days, The.
Dream of Turtle, A.
Dreams.
Drink of This Cup.
Drink to Her.
Duke is the Lad, The.
Dying Warrior, The.

East Indian, The.
Echo.
Elegiac Stanzas.
Elegiac Stanzas.
Enigma.
Epigram.--"I never gave a Kiss" (says Prue).
Epigram.--"I want the Court Guide," said My Lady, "to look".
Epigram.--What News To-day?--"Oh! Worse and Worse".
Epigram.--Said His Highness to Ned, with That Grim Face of His.
Epilogue.
Epistle from Captain Rock to Lord Lyndhurst.
Epistle from Erasmus on Earth to Cicero in the Shades.
Epistle from Henry of Exeter to John of Tuam.
Epistle from Tom Crib to Big Ben.
Epistle of Condolence.
Epitaph on a Tuft-Hunter.
Erin, oh Erin.
Erin! The Tear and the Smile in Thine Eyes.
Euthanasia of Van, The.
Eveleen's Bower.
Evening Gun, The.
Evenings in Greece.
Exile, The.
Expostulation to Lord King, An.
Extract from a Prologue.
Extracts from the Diary of a Politician.

Fables for the Holy Alliance,
     I. The Dissolution of the Holy Alliance.
    II. The Looking-Glasses.
   III. The Torch of Liberty.
    IV. The Fly and the Bullock.
     V. Church and State.
    VI. The Little Grand Lama.
   VII. The Extinguishers.
  VIII. Louis Fourteenth's Wig.
Fairest! put on Awhile.
Fallen is Thy Throne.
Fall of Hebe, The.
Fancy.
Fancy Fair, The.
Fanny, Dearest.
Fare Thee Well, Thou Lovely One.
Farewell!--but Whenever You welcome the Hour.
Farewell, Theresa.
Fear not That, While Around Thee.
Fill the Bumper Fair.
Fire-Worshippers, The.
First Angel's Story.
Flow on, Thou Shining River.
Fly not Yet.
Fools' Paradise.
Forget not the Field.
For Thee Alone.
Fortune-Teller, The.
Fragment.
Fragment of a Character.
Fragment of a Mythological Hymn to Love.
Fragments of College Exercises.
From Life without Freedom.
From the Hon. Henry ----, to Lady Emma ----.
From This Hour the Pledge is given.
Fudge Family in Paris, The.
  Letter I. From Miss Biddy Fudge to Miss Dorothy ----, of Clonkilty, in
        Ireland.
    II. From Phil. Fudge, Esq., to the Lord Viscount Castlereagh.
   III. From Mr. Bob Fudge to Richard ----, Esq.
    IV. From Phelim Connor to ----.
     V. From Miss Biddy Fudge to Miss Dorothy ----.
    VI. From Phil. Fudge, Esq., to His Brother Tim Fudge, Esq., Barrister
        at Law.
   VII. From Phelim Connor to ----.
  VIII. From Mr. Bob Fudge to Richard ----, Esq.
    IX. From Phil. Fudge, Esq., to the Lord Viscount Castlereagh.
     X. From Miss Biddy Fudge to Miss Dorothy ----.
    XI. From Phelim Connor to ----.
   XII. From Miss Biddy Fudge to Miss Dorothy ----.
Fudges in England, The.
  Letter I. From Patrick Magan, Esq., to the Rev. Richard ---- Curate of
        ---- in Ireland.
    II. From Miss Biddy Fudge to Mrs. Elizabeth ---- Extracts from My
        Diary.
   III. From Miss Fanny Fudge to her Cousin, Kitty ----.
    IV. From Patrick Magan, Esq., to the Rev. Richard ----.
     V. From Larry O'Branigan In England, to His Wife Judy, at Mullinafad.
    VI. From Miss Biddy Fudge, to Mrs. Elizabeth ---- Extracts from My
        Diary.
   VII. From Miss Fanny Fudge, to her Cousin, Miss Kitty ----.
  VIII. From Bob Fudge, Esq., to the Rev. Mortimer O'Mulligan.
    IX. From Larry O'Branigan, to his Wife Judy.
     X. From the Rev. Mortimer O'Mulligan, to the Rev. ----.
    XI. From Patrick Magan, Esq., to the Rev. Richard ----.
Fum and Hum, the two Birds of Royalty.

Garland I send Thee, The.
Gayly sounds the Castanet.
Gazel.
Gazelle, The.
Genius and Criticism.
Genius of Harmony, The.
Ghost of Miltiades, The.
Ghost Story, A.
Go forth to the Mount.
Go, let Me weep.
Go, Now, and dream.
Go, Then--'tis Vain.
Go Where Glory waits Thee.
Grand Dinner of Type and Co.
Grecian Girl's Dream of the Blessed Islands, The.
Greek of Meleager, From the.
Guess, guess.

Halcyon hangs o'er Ocean, The.
Hark! the Vesper Hymn is stealing.
Hark! 'Tis the Breeze.
Harp That Once thro' Tara's Halls, The.
Has Sorrow Thy Young Days shaded.
Hat _versus_ Wig.
Hear Me but Once.
Here at Thy Tomb.
Here sleeps the Bard.
Here's the Bower.
Here, take My Heart.
Her Last Words at Parting.
Hero and Leander.
High-Born Ladye, The.
High Priest of Apollo to a Virgin of Delphi, From the.
Hip, Hip, Hurra.
Homeward March, The.
Hope comes Again.
Horace:
  Ode I. Lib. III.--I hate Thee, oh, Mob, as My Lady hates Delf.
  Ode XI. Lib. II.--Come, Yarmouth, My Boy, Never trouble your Brains.
  Ode XXII. Lib. I.--The Man Who keeps a Conscience Pure.
  Ode XXXVIII. Lib. I.--Boy, tell the Cook That I hate All Nicknackeries.
How Dear to Me the Hour.
How Happy, Once.
How lightly mounts the Muse's Wing.
How Oft has the Banshee cried.
How Oft, When watching Stars.
How shall I woo.
How to make a Good Politician.
How to make One's Self a Peer.
How to write by Proxy.
Hush, hush.
Hush, Sweet Lute.
Hymn of a Virgin of Delphi.
Hymn of Welcome after the Recess, A.

I'd mourn the Hopes.
"If" and "Perhaps".
If in Loving, Singing.
If Thou'lt be Mine.
If Thou wouldst have Me sing and play.
Ill Omens.
I love but Thee.
Imitation.
Imitation of Catullus.
Imitation of the Inferno of Dante.
Impromptu.
Impromptu.
Impromptu.
Incantation.
Incantation, An.
Inconstancy.
Indian Boat, The.
In Myrtle Wreaths.
Insurrection of the Papers, The.
Intended Tribute.
Intercepted Letters, etc.
  Letter I. From the Princess Charlotte of Wales to the Lady Barbara
        Ashley.
    II. From Colonel M'Mahon to Gould Francis Leckie, Esq.
   III. From George Prince Regent to the Earl of Yarmouth.
    IV. From the Right Hon. Patrick Duigenan to the Right Hon. Sir John
        Nicol.
     V. From the Countess Dowager of Cork to Lady ----.
    VI. From Abdallah, in London, to Mohassan, in Ispahan.
   VII. From Messrs. Lackington and Co. to Thomas Moore, Esq.
  VIII. From Colonel Thomas to ---- Skeffington, Esq.
        Appendix.
In the Morning of Life.
Intolerance, a Satire.
Invisible Girl, To the.
Invitation to Dinner.
Irish Antiquities.
Irish Peasant to His Mistress, The.
Irish Slave, The.
I saw from the Beach.
I saw the Moon rise Clear.
I saw Thy Form in Youthful Prime.
Is it not Sweet to think. Hereafter.
It is not the Tear at This Moment shed.
I've a Secret to tell Thee.
I Will, I will, the Conflict's past.
I wish I was by That Dim Lake.

Joke Versified, A.
Joys of Youth, how fleeting.

Keep Those Eyes Still Purely Mine.
King Crack and His Idols.
Kiss, The.

Lalla Rookh.
Lament for the Loss of Lord Bathurst's Tail.
Language of Flowers, The.
Late Scene at Swanage, A.
Latest Accounts from Olympus.
Late Tithe Case.
Leaf and the Fountain, The.
Legacy, The.
Legend of Puck the Fairy, The.
Lesbia hath a Beaming Eye.
Les Hommes Automates.
Let Erin remember the Days of Old.
Let Joy Alone be remembered Now.
Let's take This World as Some Wide Scene.
Letter from Larry O'Branigan to the Rev. Murtagh O'Mulligan.
Light of the Haram, The.
Light sounds the Harp.
Like Morning When Her Early Breeze.
Like One Who, doomed.
Limbo of Lost Reputations, The.
Lines on the Death of Joseph Atkinson, Esq., of Dublin.
Lines on the Death of Mr. Perceval.
Lines on the Death of Sheridan.
Lines on the Departure of Lords Castlereagh and Stewart for the Continent.
Lines on the Entry of the Austrians into Naples.
Lines written at the Cohos, or Falls of the Mohawk River.
Lines written in a Storm at Sea.
Lines written on leaving Philadelphia.
Literary Advertisement.
Little Man and Little Soul.
"Living Dog" and "the Dead Lion," The.
Long Years have past.
Lord Henley and St. Cecilia.
Lord, Who shall bear That Day.
Love Alone.
Love and Hope.
Love and Hymen.
Love and Marriage.
Love and Reason.
Love and the Novice.
Love and the Sun-Dial.
Love and Time.
Love is a Hunter-Boy.
Love's Light Summer-Cloud.
Loves of the Angels, The.
Love's Victory.
Love's Young Dream.
Love Thee.
Love Thee, Dearest? Love Thee.
Love, wandering Thro' the Golden Maze.
Lusitanian War-Song.
Lying.

Mad Tory and the Comet, The.
Magic Mirror, The.
Meeting of the Ships, The.
Meeting of the Waters, The.
Melologue.
Memorabilia of Last Week.
Merrily Every Bosom boundeth.
Millennium, The.
Mind Not Tho' Daylight.
Minstrel-Boy, The.
Missing.
Morality.
Moral Positions.
Mountain Sprite, The.
Mr. Roger Dodsworth.
Musical Box, The.
Musings of an Unreformed Peer.
Musings, suggested by the Late Promotion of Mrs. Nethercoat.
My Birth-Day.
My Gentle Harp.
My Harp has One Unchanging Theme.
My Heart and Lute.
My Mopsa is Little.

Natal Genius, The.
Nature's Labels.
Nay, tell Me Not, Dear.
Ne'er ask the Hour.
Ne'er Talk of Wisdom's Gloomy Schools.
Nets and Cages.
New Costume of the Ministers, The.
New Creation of Peers.
New-Fashioned Echoes.
New Grand Exhibition of Models
New Hospital for Sick Literati.
News for Country Cousins.
Night Dance, The.
Nights of Music.
Night Thought, A.
No--leave My Heart to Rest.
Nonsense.
Not from Thee.
Notions on Reform.
Numbering of the Clergy, The.

Occasional Address for the Opening of the New Theatre of St. Stephen.
Occasional Epilogue.
Odes to Nea.
Ode to a Hat.
Ode to Don Miguel.
Ode to Ferdinand.
Ode to the Goddess Ceres.
Ode to the Sublime Porte.
Ode to the Woods and Forests.
O'Donohue's Mistress.
Oft, in the Stilly Night.
Oh! Arranmore, Loved Arranmore.
Oh Banquet Not.
Oh! Blame Not the Bard.
Oh! Breathe Not His Name.
Oh, call it by Some Better Name.
Oh, come to Me When Daylight sets.
Oh, could We do with This World of Ours.
Oh, Days of Youth.
Oh, do not look so Bright and Blest.
Oh! doubt Me Not.
Oh Fair! oh Purest.
Oh for the Swords of Former Tim.
Oh, guard our Affection.
Ob! had We Some Bright Little Isle of Our Own.
Oh, No--Not--Even. When First We loved.
Oh, Soon return.
Oh, teach Me to love Thee.
Oh the Shamrock.
Oh, the Sight Entrancing.
Oh! think Not My Spirits are Always as Light.
Oh Thou Who dry'st the Mourner's Tear.
Oh, Ye Dead.
On a Squinting Poetess.
One Bumper at Parting.
One Dear Smile.
On Music.
On the Death of a Friend.
On the Death of a Lady.
Origin of the Harp, The.
O say, Thou Best and Brightest.
Our First Young Love.

Paddy's Metamorphosis.
Paradise and the Peri.
Parallel, The.
Parody of a Celebrated Letter.
Parting before the Battle, The.
Pastoral Ballad, A.
Peace and Glory.
Peace be around Thee.
Peace, Peace to Him That's gone.
Peace to the Slumberers.
Periwinkles and the Locusts, The.
Petition of the Orangemen of Ireland, The.
Philosopher Artistippus to a Lamp, The.
Pilgrim, The.
Poor Broken Flower.
Poor Wounded; Heart.
Pretty Rose-tree.
Prince's Day, The.
Proposals for a Gynsecocracy.

Quick! We have but a Second.

Reason, Folly, and Beauty.
Recent Dialogue, A.
Rector and His Curate, The.
Reflection at Sea, A.
Reflections.
Reinforcements for Lord Wellington.
Religion and Trade.
Remember Thee.
Remember the Time.
Remonstrance.
Resemblance, The.
Resolutions passed at a Late Meeting of Reverends and Right Reverends.
Reuben and Rose.
Reverend Pamphleteer, The.
Rhymes on the Road.
  Introductory Rhymes.
  Extract I. Geneva.
         II. Geneva.
        III. Geneva.
         IV. Milan.
          V. Padua.
         VI. Venice.
        VII. Venice.
       VIII. Venice.
         IX. Venice.
          X. Mantua.
         XI. Florence.
        XII. Florence.
       XIII. Rome.
        XIV. Rome.
         XV. Rome.
        XVI. Les Charmettes.
Rich and Rare were the Gems She wore.
Rings and Seals.
Ring, The.
Ring, The.
Rival Topics.
Rondeau.
Rose of the Desert.
Round the World goes.
Row Gently Here.
Russian Lover, The.

Sad Case, A.
Sail on, sail on.
Sale of Cupid.
Sale of Loves, The.
Sale of Tools, The.
Say, What shall be Our Sport To-day.
Say, What shall We dance.
Scene from a Play.
Scepticism.
Sceptic, The.
Second Angel's Story.
See the Dawn from Heaven.
Selections.
Shall the Harp Then be Silent.
She is Far from the Land.
She sung of Love.
Shield, The.
Shine Out, Stars.
Should Those Fond Hopes.
Shrine, The.
Silence is in Our Festal Halls.
Since First Thy Word.
Sing--sing--Music was given.
Sing, Sweet Harp.
Sinking Fund cried, The.
Sir Andrew's Dream.
Sketch of the First Act of a New Romantic Drama.
Slumber, oh slumber.
Snake, The.
Snow Spirit, The.
Some Account of the Late Dinner to Dan.
Song.--Ah! Where are They, Who heard, in Former Hours.
  Array Thee, Love, Array Thee, Love.
  As by the Shore, at Break of Day.
  As Love One Summer Eve was straying.
  As o'er Her Loom the Lesbian Maid.
  As Once a Grecian Maiden wove.
  Bring Hither, bring Thy Lute, while Day is dying.
  Calm as Beneath its Mother's eyes.
  Fly from the World, O Bessy! to Me.
  Have You not seen the Timid Tear.
  Here, While the Moonlight Dim.
  If I swear by That Eye, You'll allow.
  If to see Thee be to love Thee.
  I saw from Yonder Silent Cave.
  March! nor heed Those Anna That hold Thee.
  Mary, I believed Thee True.
  No Life is Like the Mountaineer's.
  Of All My Happiest Hours of Joy.
  Oh, Memory, How Coldly.
  Oh, Where art Thou dreaming.
  Raise the Buckler-poise the Lance.
  Smoothly flowing Thro' Verdant Vales.
  Some Mortals There may be, so Wise, or so Fine.
  Take back the Sigh, Thy Lips of Art.
  The Wreath You wove, the Wreath You wove.
  Think on that Look Whose Melting Ray.
  Thou art not Dead--Thou art not Dead.
  "'Tis the Vine! 'tis the  Vine!" said the Cup-loving Boy.
  Up and march! the Timbrel's Sound.
  Up with the Sparkling Brimmer.
  Weeping for Thee, My Love, Thro' the Long Day.
  Welcome Sweet Bird, Thro' the Sunny Air winging.
  When Evening Shades are falling.
  When the Balaika.
  When Time Who steals Our Years Away.
  Where is the Heart That would not give.
  "Who comes so Gracefully,".
  Who'll buy?--'tis Folly's Shop, who'll buy.
  Why does Azure deck the Sky.
  Yes! had I leisure to sigh and mourn.
Song and Trio.
Song and Trio.
Song of a Hyperborean.
Song of Fionnuala, The.
Song of Hercules to his Daughter.
Song of Innisfall.
Song of Old Puck.
Song of O'Ruark, The.
Song of the Battle Eve.
Song of the Box, The.
Song of the Departing Spirit of Tithe.
Song of the Evil Spirit of the Woods.
Song of the Nubian Girl.
Song of the Olden Time, The.
Song of the Poco-Curante Society.
Song of the two Cupbearers.
Songs of the Church.
Sound the Loud Timbrel.
Sovereign Woman.
So Warmly We met.
Spa, The Wellington.
Speculation, A.
Speech on the Umbrella Question.
Spring and Autumn.
Stanzas.
Stanzas from the Banks of the Shannon.
Stanzas written in Anticipation of Defeat.
Steersman's Song, The.
Still, like Dew in Silence falling.
Still Thou fliest.
Still When Daylight.
St. Jerome on Earth.
Stranger, The.
St. Senanus and the Lady.
Study from the Antique, A.
Sublime was the Warning.
Summer Fte, The.
Summer Webs, The.
Sunday Ethics.
Surprise, The.
Sweet Innisfallen.
Sylph's Ball, The.
Sympathy.

Take Back the Virgin Page.
Take Hence the Bowl.
Tear, The.
Tell Her, oh, tell Her.
Tell-Tale Lyre, The.
Temple to Friendship, A.
The Bird, let Loose.
Thee, Thee, Only Thee.
Then, Fare Thee Well.
Then First from Love.
There are Sounds of Mirth.
There comes a Time.
There is a Bleak Desert.
There's Something Strange.
They know not My Heart.
They may rail at This Life.
They met but Once.
They tell Me Thou'rt the Favored Guest.
Third Angel's Story.
This Life is All checkered with Pleasures and Woes.
This World is All a Fleeting Show..
Tho, Humble the Banquet.
Tho' Lightly sounds the Song I sing.
Those Evening Bells.
Tho' the Last Glimpse of Erin with Sorrow I see.
Tho' 'tis All but a Dream.
Thou art, O God.
Thou bidst Me sing.
Thoughts on Mischief.
Thoughts on Patrons, Puffs, and Other Matters.
Thoughts on Tar Barrels.
Thoughts on the Late Destructive Propositions of the Tories.
Thoughts on the Present Government of Ireland.
Thou lovest No More.
Three Doctors, The.
Tibullus to Sulpicia.
Time I've lost in wooing, The.
'Tis All for Thee.
'Tis Gone, and For Ever.
'Tis Sweet to think.
'Tis the Last Rose of Summer.
To......: And hast Thou marked the Pensive Shade.
To......: Come, take Thy Harp--'tis vain to muse.
To......: Never mind How the Pedagogue proses.
To......: Put off the Vestal Veil, nor, oh.
To......: Remember Him Thou leavest behind.
To......: Sweet Lady, look not Thus Again.
To......: That Wrinkle, when First I espied it.
To......: The World had just begun to steal.
To......: 'Tis Time, I feel, to leave Thee Now.
To......: To be the Theme of Every Hour.
To......:  When I loved You, I can't but allow.
To......: With All My Soul, Then, let us part.
To......'s Picture: Go Then, if She, Whose Shade Thou art.
To a Boy, with a Watch.
To a Lady, with Some Manuscript Poems.
To a Lady, on Her singing.
To Cara, after an Interval of Absence.
To Cara, oh the Dawning of a New Year's Day.
To Caroline, Viscountess Valletort.
To Cloe.
To-Day, Dearest, is Ours.
To George Morgan, Esq.
To His Serene Highness the Duke of Montpensier.
To James Corry, Esq.
To Joseph Atkinson, Esq.
To Julia, in Allusion to Some Illiberal Criticisms.
To Julia: Mock me No More with Love's Beguiling Dream.
To Julia: Though Fate, My Girl, may bid Us part.
To Julia, on Her Birthday.
To Julia: I saw the Peasant's Hand Unkind.
To Julia weeping.
To Ladies' Eyes.
To Lady Heathcote.
To Lady Holland.
To Lady Jersey.
To Lord Viscount Strangford.
To Miss Moore.
To Miss Susan Beckford.
To Miss ---- on Her asking the Author Why She had Sleepless Nights.
To Mrs. Bl----, written in Her Album.
To Mrs. ----, on Some Calumnies against Her Character.
To Mrs. ----: To see Thee Every Day That came.
To Mrs. ----, on Her Beautiful Translation of Voiture's Kiss.
To Mrs. Henry Tighe.
To My Mother.
To Phillis.
To Rosa, written during Illness.
To Rosa: And are You Then a Thing of Art.
To Rosa. Is the Song of Rosa Mute.
To Rosa: Like One Who trusts to Summer Skies.
To Rosa; Say Why should the Girl of My Soul be in Tears.
Tory Pledges.
To Sir Hudson Lowe.
To the Boston Frigate.
To the Fire-Fly.
To the Flying-Fish.
To the Honorable W. R. Spencer.
To the Lady Charlotte Rawdon.
To the Large and Beautiful Miss ----.
To the Lord Viscount Forbes.
To the Marchioness Dowager of Donegall.
To the Rev. Charles Overton.
To the Reverend ----.
To Thomas Hume, Esq., M.D.
To the Ship in Which Lord Castlereagh sailed for the Continent.
Tout pour la Tripe.
To weave a Garland for the Rose.
Translation from the Gull Language.
Translations from Catullus.
Trio.
Triumph of Bigotry.
Triumph of Farce, The.
Turf shall be My Fragrant Shrine, The
'Twas One of Those Dreams.
Two Loves, The.
Twin'st Thou with' Lofty Wreath Thy Brow.

Unbind Thee, Love.
Up, Sailor Boy, 'tis Day.

Valley of the Nile, The.
Variety.
Veiled Prophet of Khorassan, The.
Verses to the Poet Crabbe's Inkstand.
Vision, A.
Vision of Philosophy, A.
Voice, The.

Wake Thee, My Dear.
Wake Up, Sweet Melody.
Waltz Duet.
Wandering Bard, The.
War against Babylon.
Warning, A.
War Song.
Watchman, The.
Weep, Children of Israel.
Weep not for Those.
Weep on, weep on.
Wellington, Lord, and the Ministers.
Wellington Spa, The.
We may roam through This World.
Were not the Sinful Mary's Tears.
What shall I sing Thee.
What's My Thought like.
What the Bee is to the Floweret.
When Abroad in the World.
When Cold in the Earth.
When e'er I see Those Smiling Eyes.
When First I met Thee.
When First That Smile.
When He, Who adores Thee.
When Love was a Child.
When Love, Who ruled.
When Midst the Gay I meet.
When Night brings the Hour.
When on the Lip the Sigh delays.
When the First Summer Bee.
When the Sad Word.
When the Wine-Cup is smiling.
When Thou shalt wander.
When Through the Piazzetta.
When to Sad Music Silent You listen.
When Twilight Dews.
Where are the Visions.
Where is the Slave.
Where is Your Dwelling, Ye Sainted.
Where shall We bury our Shame.
While gazing on the Moon's Light.
While History's Muse.
Who is the Maid.
Who'll buy My Love Knots.
Why does She so Long delay.
Wind Thy Horn, My Hunter Boy.
Wine-Cup is circling, The.
With Moonlight beaming.
Woman.
Wonder, The.
World was husht.
Wo! wo.
Wreath and the Chain, The.
Wreaths for the Ministers.
Wreath the Bowl.
Write on, write on.
Written in a Commonplace Book.
Written in the Blank Leaf of a Lady's Commonplace Book.
Written on passing Deadman's Island.

Yes, yes, When the Bloom.
Young Indian Maid, The.
Young Jessica.
Young May Moon, The.
Young Muleteers of Grenada, The.
Young Rose, The.
You remember Ellen.
Youth and Age.








ODES OF ANACREON

(1800).

TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH VERSE.

WITH NOTES.




TO

HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS

THE PRINCE OF WALES.


SIR,--In allowing me to dedicate this Work to Your Royal Highness, you
have conferred upon me an honor which I feel very sensibly: and I have
only to regret that the pages which you have thus distinguished are not
more deserving of such illustrious patronage.

Believe me, SIR,
With every sentiment of respect,
Your Royal Highness's
Very grateful and devoted Servant,

THOMAS MOORE.






REMARKS ON ANACREON


There is but little known, with certainty of the life of Anacreon.
Chamaeleon Heracleotes, who wrote upon the subject, has been lost in the
general wreck of ancient literature. The editors of the poet have
collected the few trifling anecdotes which are scattered through the
extant authors of antiquity, and, supplying the deficiency of materials by
fictions of their own imagination, have arranged what they call a life of
Anacreon. These specious fabrications are intended to indulge that
interest which we naturally feel in the biography of illustrious men; but
it is rather a dangerous kind of illusion, as it confounds the limits of
history and romance, and is too often supported by unfaithful citation.

Our poet was born in the city of Teos, in the delicious region of Ionia,
and the time of his birth appears to have been in the sixth century before
Christ. He flourished at that remarkable period when, under the polished
tyrants Hipparchus and Polycrates, Athens and Samos were become the rival
asylums of genius. There is nothing certain known about his family; and
those who pretend to discover in Plato that he was a descendant of the
monarch Codrus, show much more of zeal than of either accuracy or
judgment.

The disposition and talents of Anacreon recommended him to the monarch of
Samos, and he was formed to be the friend of such a prince as Polycrates.
Susceptible only to the pleasures, he felt not the corruptions, of the
court; and while Pythagoras fled from the tyrant, Anacreon was celebrating
his praises oh the lyre. We are told, too, by Maximus Tyrius, that, by the
influence of his amatory songs, he softened the mind of Polycrates into a
spirit of benevolence towards his subjects.

The amours of the poet, and the rivalship of the tyrant, I shall pass
over in silence; and there are few, I presume, who will regret the
omission of most of those anecdotes, which the industry of some editors
has not only promulged, but discussed. Whatever is repugnant to modesty
and virtue is considered, in ethical science, by a supposition very
favorable to humanity, as impossible; and this amiable persuasion should
be much more strongly entertained where the transgression wars with nature
as well as virtue. But why are we not allowed to indulge in the
presumption? Why are we officiously reminded that there have been really
such instances of depravity?

Hipparchus, who now maintained at Athens the power which his father
Pisistratus had usurped, was one of those princes who may be said to have
polished the fetters of their subjects. He was the first, according to
Plato, who edited the poems of Homer, and commanded them to be sung by the
rhapsodists at the celebration of the Panathenaea. From his court, which
was a sort of galaxy of genius, Anacreon could not long be absent.
Hipparchus sent a barge for him; the poet readily embraced the invitation,
and the Muses and the Loves were wafted with him to Athens.

The manner of Anacreon's death was singular. We are told that in the
eighty-fifth year of his age he was choked by a grape-stone; and however
we may smile at their enthusiastic partiality who see in this easy and
characteristic death a peculiar indulgence of Heaven, we cannot help
admiring that his fate should have been so emblematic of his disposition.
Caelius Calcagninus alludes to this catastrophe in the following epitaph
on our poet:--

  Those lips, then, hallowed sage, which poured along
  A music sweet as any cygnet's song,
    The grape hath closed for ever!
  Here let the ivy kiss the poet's tomb,
  Here let the rose he loved with laurels bloom,
    In bands that ne'er shall sever.
  But far be thou, oh! far, unholy vine,
  By whom the favorite minstrel of the Nine
    Lost his sweet vital breath;
  Thy God himself now blushes to confess,
  Once hallowed vine! he feels he loves thee less,
    Since poor Anacreon's death.

It has been supposed by some writers that Anacreon and Sappho were
contemporaries; and the very thought of an intercourse between persons so
congenial, both in warmth of passion and delicacy of genius, gives such
play to the imagination that the mind loves to indulge in it. But the
vision dissolves before historical truth; and Chamaeleon, and Hermesianax,
who are the source of the supposition, are considered as having merely
indulged in a poetical anachronism.

To infer the moral dispositions of a poet from the tone of sentiment
which pervades his works, is sometimes a very fallacious analogy; but the
soul of Anacreon speaks so unequivocally through his odes, that we may
safely consult them as the faithful mirrors of his heart. We find him
there the elegant voluptuary, diffusing the seductive charm of sentiment
over passions and propensities at which rigid morality must frown. His
heart, devoted to indolence, seems to have thought that there is wealth
enough in happiness, but seldom happiness in mere wealth. The
cheerfulness, indeed, with which he brightens his old age is interesting
and endearing; like his own rose, he is fragrant even in decay. But the
most peculiar feature of his mind is that love of simplicity, which be
attributes to himself so feelingly, and which breathes characteristically
throughout all that he has sung. In truth, if we omit those few vices in
our estimate which religion, at that time, not only connived at, but
consecrated, we shall be inclined to say that the disposition of our poet
was amiable; that his morality was relaxed, but not abandoned; and that
Virtue, with her zone loosened, may be an apt emblem of the character of
Anacreon.

Of his person and physiognomy, time has preserved such uncertain
memorials, that it were better, perhaps, to leave the pencil to fancy; and
few can read the Odes of Anacreon without imaging to themselves the form
of the animated old bard, crowned with roses, and singing cheerfully to
his lyre.

After the very enthusiastic eulogiums bestowed both by ancients and
moderns upon the poems of Anacreon, we need not be diffident in expressing
our raptures at their beauty, nor hesitate to pronounce them the most
polished remains of antiquity. They are indeed, all beauty, all
enchantment. He steals us so insensibly along with him, that we sympathize
even in his excesses. In his amatory odes there is a delicacy of
compliment not to be found in any other ancient poet. Love at that period
was rather an unrefined emotion; and the intercourse of the sexes was
animated more by passion than by sentiment. They knew not those little
tendernesses which form the spiritual part of affection; their expression
of feeling was therefore rude and unvaried, and the poetry of love
deprived it of its most captivating graces. Anacreon, however, attained
some ideas of this purer gallantry; and the same delicacy of mind which
led him to this refinement, prevented him also from yielding to the
freedom of language which has sullied the pages of all the other poets.
His descriptions are warm; but the warmth is in the ideas, not the words.
He is sportive without being wanton, and ardent without being licentious.
His poetic invention is always most brilliantly displayed in those
allegorical fictions which so many have endeavored to imitate, though all
have confessed them to be inimitable. Simplicity is the distinguishing
feature of these odes, and they interest by their innocence, as much as
they fascinate by their beauty. They may be said, indeed, to be the very
infants of the Muses, and to lisp in numbers.

I shall not be accused of enthusiastic partiality by those who have read
and felt the original; but to others, I am conscious, this should not be
the language of a translator, whose faint reflection of such beauties can
but ill justify his admiration of them.

In the age of Anacreon music and poetry were inseparable. These kindred
talents were for a long time associated, and the poet always sung his own
compositions to the lyre. It is probable that they were not set to any
regular air, but rather a kind of musical recitation, which was varied
according to the fancy and feelings of the moment. The poems of Anacreon
were sung at banquets as late as the time of Aulus Gellius, who tells us
that he heard one of the odes performed at a birthday entertainment.

The singular beauty of our poet's style and the apparent facility,
perhaps, of his metre have attracted, as I have already remarked, a crowd
of imitators. Some of these have succeeded with wonderful felicity, as may
be discerned in the few odes which are attributed to writers of a later
period. But none of his emulators have been half so dangerous to his fame
as those Greek ecclesiastics of the early ages, who, being conscious of
their own inferiority to their great prototypes, determined on removing
all possibility of comparison, and, under a semblance of moral zeal,
deprived the world of some of the most exquisite treasures of ancient
times. The works of Sappho and Alcaeus were among those flowers of Grecian
literature which thus fell beneath the rude hand of ecclesiastical
presumption. It is true they pretended that this sacrifice of genius was
hallowed by the interests of religion, but I have already assigned the
most probable motive; and if Gregorius Nazianzenus had not written
Anacreontics, we might now perhaps have the works of the Teian
unmutilated, and be empowered to say exultingly with Horace,

  _Nec si quid olim lusit Anacreon
  delevit aetas_.

The zeal by which these bishops professed to be actuated gave birth more
innocently, indeed, to an absurd species of parody, as repugnant to piety
as it is to taste, where the poet of voluptuousness was made a preacher of
the gospel, and his muse, like the Venus in armor at Lacedaemon, was
arrayed in all the severities of priestly instruction. Such was the
"Anacreon Recantatus," by Carolus de Aquino, a Jesuit, published 1701,
which consisted of a series of palinodes to the several songs of our poet.
Such, too, was the Christian Anacreon of Patrignanus, another Jesuit, who
preposterously transferred to a most sacred subject all that the Graecian
poet had dedicated to festivity and love.

His metre has frequently been adopted by the modern Latin poets; and
Scaliger, Taubman, Barthius, and others, have shown that it is by no means
uncongenial with that language. The Anacreontics of Scaliger, however,
scarcely deserve the name; as they glitter all over with conceits, and,
though often elegant, are always labored. The beautiful fictions of
Angerianus preserve more happily than any others the delicate turn of
those allegorical fables, which, passing so frequently through the mediums
of version and imitation, have generally lost their finest rays in the
transmission. Many of the Italian poets have indulged their fancies upon
the subjects; and in the manner of Anacreon, Bernardo Tasso first
introduced the metre, which was afterwards polished and enriched by
Chabriera and others.






ODES OF ANACREON






ODE I.[1]


I saw the smiling bard of pleasure,
The minstrel of the Teian measure;
'Twas in a vision of the night,
He beamed upon my wondering sight.
I heard his voice, and warmly prest
The dear enthusiast to my breast.
His tresses wore a silvery dye,
But beauty sparkled in his eye;
Sparkled in his eyes of fire,
Through the mist of soft desire.
His lip exhaled, when'er he sighed,
The fragrance of the racy tide;
And, as with weak and reeling feet
He came my cordial kiss to meet,
An infant, of the Cyprian band,
Guided him on with tender hand.
Quick from his glowing brows he drew
His braid, of many a wanton hue;
I took the wreath, whose inmost twine
Breathed of him and blushed with wine.
I hung it o'er my thoughtless brow,
And ah! I feel its magic now:
I feel that even his garland's touch
Can make the bosom love too much.


[1] This ode is the first of the series in the Vatican manuscript, which
attributes it to no other poet than Anacreon. They who assert that the
manuscript imputes it to Basilius, have been mislead. Whether it be the
production of Anacreon or not, it has all the features of ancient
simplicity, and is a beautiful imitation of the poet's happiest manner.






ODE II.


Give me the harp of epic song,
Which Homer's finger thrilled along;
But tear away the sanguine string,
For war is not the theme I sing.
Proclaim the laws of festal right,[1]
I'm monarch of the board to-night;
And all around shall brim as high,
And quaff the tide as deep as I.
And when the cluster's mellowing dews
Their warm enchanting balm infuse,
Our feet shall catch the elastic bound,
And reel us through the dance's round.
Great Bacchus! we shall sing to thee,
In wild but sweet ebriety;
Flashing around such sparks of thought,
As Bacchus could alone have taught.

Then, give the harp of epic song,
Which Homer's finger thrilled along;
But tear away the sanguine string,
For war is not the theme I sing.


[1] The ancients  prescribed certain laws of drinking at their festivals,
for an account of which see the commentators. Anacreon here acts the
symposiarch, or master of the festival.






ODE III.[1]


Listen to the Muse's lyre,
Master of the pencil's fire!
Sketched in painting's bold display,
Many a city first portray;
Many a city, revelling free,
Full of loose festivity.
Picture then a rosy train,
Bacchants straying o'er the plain;
Piping, as they roam along,
Roundelay or shepherd-song.
Paint me next, if painting may
Such a theme as this portray,
All the earthly heaven of love
These delighted mortals prove.


[1] La Fosse has thought proper to lengthen this poem by considerable
interpolations of his own, which he thinks are indispensably necessary to
the completion of the description.






ODE IV.[1]


Vulcan! hear your glorious task;
I did not from your labors ask
In gorgeous panoply to shine,
For war was ne'er a sport of mine.
No--let me have a silver bowl,
Where I may cradle all my soul;
But mind that, o'er its simple frame
No mimic constellations flame;
Nor grave upon the swelling side,
Orion, scowling o'er the tide.

I care not for the glittering wain,
Nor yet the weeping sister train.
But let the vine luxuriant roll
Its blushing tendrils round the bowl,
While many a rose-lipped bacchant maid
Is culling clusters in their shade.
Let sylvan gods, in antic shapes,
Wildly press the gushing grapes,
And flights of Loves, in wanton play,
Wing through the air their winding way;
While Venus, from her arbor green,
Looks laughing at the joyous scene,
And young Lyaeus by her side
Sits, worthy of so bright a bride.


[1] This ode, Aulus Gellius tells us, was performed at an entertainment
where he was present.






ODE V.


Sculptor, wouldst thou glad my soul,
Grave for me an ample bowl,
Worthy to shine in hall or bower,
When spring-time brings the reveller's hour.
Grave it with themes of chaste design,
Fit for a simple board like mine.
Display not there the barbarous rites
In which religious zeal delights;
Nor any tale of tragic fate
Which History shudders to relate.
No--cull thy fancies from above,
Themes of heaven and themes of love.
Let Bacchus, Jove's ambrosial boy,
Distil the grape in drops of joy,
And while he smiles at every tear,
Let warm-eyed Venus, dancing near,
With spirits of the genial bed,
The dewy herbage deftly tread.
Let Love be there, without his arms,
In timid nakedness of charms;
And all the Graces, linked with Love,
Stray, laughing, through the shadowy grove;
While rosy boys disporting round,
In circlets trip the velvet ground.
But ah! if there Apollo toys,[1]
I tremble for the rosy boys.


[1] An allusion to the fable that Apollo had killed his beloved boy
Hyacinth, while playing with him at quoits. "This" (says M. La Fosse) "is
assuredly the sense of the text, and it cannot admit of any other."






ODE VI.[1]


As late I sought the spangled bowers,
To cull a wreath of matin flowers,
Where many an early rose was weeping,
I found the urchin Cupid sleeping,
I caught the boy, a goblet's tide
Was richly mantling by my side,
I caught him by his downy wing,
And whelmed him in the racy spring.
Then drank I down the poisoned bowl,
And love now nestles in my soul.
Oh, yes, my soul is Cupid's nest,
I feel him fluttering in my breast.


[1] This beautiful fiction, which the commentators have attributed to
Julian, a royal poet, the Vatican MS. pronounces to be the genuine
offspring of Anacreon.






ODE VII.


The women tell me every day
That all my bloom has pas past away.
"Behold," the pretty wantons cry,
"Behold this mirror with a sigh;
The locks upon thy brow are few,
And like the rest, they're withering too!"
Whether decline has thinned my hair,
I'm sure I neither know nor care;
But this I know, and this I feel
As onward to the tomb I steal,
That still as death approaches nearer,
The joys of life are sweeter, dearer;
And had I but an hour to live,
That little hour to bliss I'd give.






ODE VIII.[1]


I care not for the idle state
Of Persia's king, the rich, the great.
I envy not the monarch's throne,
Nor wish the treasured gold my own
But oh! be mine the rosy wreath,
Its freshness o'er my brow to breathe;
Be mine the rich perfumes that flow,
To cool and scent my locks of snow.
To-day I'll haste to quaff my wine
As if to-morrow ne'er would shine;
But if to-morrow comes, why then--
I'll haste to quaff my wine again.
And thus while all our days are bright,
Nor time has dimmed their bloomy light,
Let us the festal hours beguile
With mantling pup and cordial smile;
And shed from each new bowl of wine,
The richest drop on Bacchus' shrine
For death may come, with brow unpleasant,
May come, when least we wish him present,
And beckon to the Sable shore,
And grimly bid us--drink no more!


[1] Baxter conjectures that this was written upon the occasion of our
poet's returning the money to Polycrates, according to the anecdote in
Stobaeus.






ODE IX.


I pray thee, by the gods above,
Give me the mighty bowl I love,
And let me sing, in wild delight,
"I will--I will be mad to-night!"
Alcmaeon once, as legends tell,
Was frenzied by the fiends of hell;
Orestes, too, with naked tread,
Frantic paced the mountain-head;
And why? a murdered mother's shade
Haunted them still where'er they strayed.
But ne'er could I a murderer be,
The grape alone shall bleed for me;
Yet can I shout, with wild delight,
"I will--I will be mad to-night."

Alcides' self, in days of yore,
Imbrued his hands in youthful gore,
And brandished, with a maniac joy,
The quiver of the expiring boy:
And Ajax, with tremendous shield,
Infuriate scoured the guiltless field.
But I, whose hands no weapon ask,
No armor but this joyous flask;
The trophy of whose frantic hours
Is but a scattered wreath of flowers,
Ev'n I can sing, with wild delight,
"I will--I will be mad to-night!"






ODE X.[1]


How am I to punish thee,
For the wrong thou'st done to me
Silly swallow, prating thing--
Shall I clip that wheeling wing?
Or, as Tereus did, of old,[2]
(So the fabled tale is told,)
Shall I tear that tongue away,
Tongue that uttered such a lay?
Ah, how thoughtless hast thou been!
Long before the dawn was seen,
When a dream came o'er my mind,
Picturing her I worship, kind,
Just when I was nearly blest,
Loud thy matins broke my rest!


[1] This ode is addressed to a swallow.

[2] Modern poetry has conferred the name of Philomel upon the nightingale;
but many respectable authorities among the ancients assigned this
metamorphose to Progne, and made Philomel the swallow, as Anacreon does
here.






ODE XI.[1]


"Tell me, gentle youth, I pray thee,
What in purchase shall I pay thee
For this little waxen toy,
Image of the Paphian boy?"
Thus I said, the other day,
To a youth who past my way:
"Sir," (he answered, and the while
Answered all in Doric style,)
"Take it, for a trifle take it;
'Twas not I who dared to make it;
No, believe me, 'twas not I;
Oh, it has cost me many a sigh,
And I can no longer keep
Little Gods, who murder sleep!"
"Here, then, here," (I said with joy,)
"Here is silver for the boy:
He shall be my bosom guest,
Idol of my pious breast!"

Now, young Love, I have thee mine,
Warm me with that torch of thine;
Make me feel as I have felt,
Or thy waxen frame shall melt:
I must burn with warm desire,
Or thou, my boy--in yonder fire.[2]


[1] It is difficult to preserve with any grace the narrative simplicity of
this ode, and the humor of the turn with which it concludes. I feel,
indeed, that the translation must appear vapid, if not ludicrous, to an
English reader.

[2] From this Longepierre conjectures, that, whatever Anacreon might say,
he felt sometimes the inconveniences of old age, and here solicits from
the power of Love a warmth which he could no longer expect from Nature.






ODE XII.


They tell how Atys, wild with love,
Roams the mount and haunted grove;[1]
Cvbele's name he howls around,
The gloomy blast returns the sound!
Oft too, by Claros' hallowed spring,[2]
The votaries of the laurelled king
Quaff the inspiring, magic stream,
And rave in wild, prophetic dream.
But frenzied dreams are not for me,
Great Bacchus is my deity!
Full of mirth, and full of him,
While floating odors round me swim,
While mantling bowls are full supplied,
And you sit blushing by my side,
I will be mad and raving too--
Mad, my girl, with love for you!


[1] There are many contradictory stories of the loves of Cybele and Atys.
It is certain that he was mutilated,  but whether by his own fury, or
Cybele's jealousy, is a point upon which authors are not agreed.

[2] This fountain was in a grove, consecrated to Apollo, and situated
between Colophon and Lebedos, in Ionia. The god had an oracle there.






ODE XIII.


I will, I will, the conflict's past,
And I'll consent to love at last.
Cupid has long, with smiling art,
Invited me to yield my heart;
And I have thought that peace of mind
Should not be for a smile resigned;
And so repelled the tender lure,
And hoped my heart would sleep secure.

But, slighted in his boasted charms,
The angry infant flew to arms;
He slung his quiver's golden frame,
He took his bow; his shafts of flame,
And proudly summoned me to yield,
Or meet him on the martial field.
And what did I unthinking do?
I took to arms, undaunted, too;
Assumed the corslet, shield, and spear,
And, like Pelides, smiled at fear.

Then (hear it, All ye powers above!)
I fought with Love! I fought with Love!
And now his arrows all were shed,
And I had just in terror fled--
When, heaving an indignant sigh,
To see me thus unwounded fly,
And, having now no other dart,
He shot himself into my heart![1]
My heart--alas the luckless day!
Received the God, and died away.
Farewell, farewell, my faithless shield!
Thy lord at length is forced to yield.
Vain, vain, is every outward care,
The foe's within, and triumphs there.


[1] Dryden has parodied this thought in the following extravagant lines:--
   ----I'm all o'er Love;
  Nay, I am Love, Love shot, and shot so fast,
  He shot himself into my breast at last.






ODE XIV.[1]


Count me, on the summer trees,
Every leaf that courts the breeze;
Count me, on the foamy deep,
Every wave that sinks to sleep;
Then, when you have numbered these
Billowy tides and leafy trees,
Count me all the flames I prove,
All the gentle nymphs I love.
First, of pure Athenian maids
Sporting in their olive shades,
You may reckon just a score,
Nay, I'll grant you fifteen more.
In the famed Corinthian grove,
Where such countless wantons rove,[2]
Chains of beauties may be found,
Chains, by which my heart is bound;
There, indeed, are nymphs divine,
Dangerous to a soul like mine.
Many bloom in Lesbos' isle;
Many in Ionia smile;
Rhodes a pretty swarm can boast;
Caria too contains a host.
Sum them all--of brown and fair
You may count two thousand there.
What, you stare? I pray you peace!
More I'll find before I cease.
Have I told you all my flames,
'Mong the amorous Syrian dames?
Have I numbered every one,
Glowing under Egypt's sun?
Or the nymphs, who blushing sweet
Deck the shrine of Love in Crete;
Where the God, with festal play,
Holds eternal holiday?
Still in clusters, still remain
Gades' warm, desiring train:[3]
Still there lies a myriad more
On the sable India's shore;
These, and many far removed,
All are loving--all are loved!


[1] The poet, in this catalogue of his mistresses, means nothing more,
than, by a lively hyperbole, to inform us, that his heart, unfettered by
any one object, was warm with devotion towards the sex in general. Cowley
is indebted to this ode for the hint of his ballad, called "The
Chronicle."

[2] Corinth was very famous for the beauty and number of its courtesans.
Venus was the deity principally worshipped by the people, and their
constant prayer was, that the gods should increase the number of her
worshippers.

[3] The music of the Gaditanian females had all the voluptuous character
of their dancing, as appears from Martial.






ODE XV.[1]


Tell me, why, my sweetest dove,
Thus your humid pinions move,
Shedding through the air in showers
Essence of the balmiest flowers?
Tell me whither, whence you rove,
Tell me all, my sweetest dove.

Curious stranger, I belong
To the bard of Teian song;
With his mandate now I fly
To the nymph of azure eye;--
She, whose eye has maddened many,
But the poet more than any,
Venus, for a hymn of love,
Warbled in her votive grove,[2]
('Twas, in sooth a gentle lay,)
Gave me to the bard away.
See me now his faithful minion,--
Thus with softly-gliding pinion,
To his lovely girl I bear
Songs of passion through the air.
Oft he blandly whispers me,
"Soon, my bird, I'll set you free."
But in vain he'll bid me fly,
I shall serve him till I die.
Never could my plumes sustain
Ruffling winds and chilling rain,
O'er the plains, or in the dell,
On the mountain's savage swell,
Seeking in the desert wood
Gloomy shelter, rustic food.
Now I lead a life of ease,
Far from rugged haunts like these.
From Anacreon's hand I eat
Food delicious, viands sweet;
Flutter o'er his goblet's brim,
Sip the foamy wine with him.
Then, when I have wantoned round
To his lyre's beguiling sound;
Or with gently moving-wings
Fanned the minstrel while he sings;
On his harp I sink in slumbers,
Dreaming still of dulcet numbers!

This is all--away--away--
You have made me waste the day.
How I've chattered! prating crow
Never yet did chatter so.


[1] The dove of Anacreon, bearing a letter from the poet to his mistress,
is met by a stranger, with whom this dialogue, is imagined.

[2] "This passage is invaluable, and I do not think that anything so
beautiful or so delicate has ever been said. What an idea does it give of
the poetry of the man, from whom Venus herself, the mother of the Graces
and the Pleasures, purchases a little hymn with one of her favorite
doves!"--LONGEPIERRE.






ODE XVI.[1]


Thou, whose soft and rosy hues
Mimic form and soul infuse,
Best of painters, come portray
The lovely maid that's far away.
Far away, my soul! thou art,
But I've thy beauties all by heart.
Paint her jetty ringlets playing,
Silky locks, like tendrils straying;[2]
And, if painting hath the skill
To make the spicy balm distil,
Let every little lock exhale
A sigh of perfume on the gale.
Where her tresses' curly flow
Darkles o'er the brow of snow,
Let her forehead beam to light,
Burnished as the ivory bright.
Let her eyebrows smoothly rise
In jetty arches o'er her eyes,
Each, a crescent gently gliding,
Just commingling, just dividing.

But, hast thou any sparkles warm,
The lightning of her eyes to form?
Let them effuse the azure rays,
That in Minerva's glances blaze,
Mixt with the liquid light that lies
In Cytherea's languid eyes.
O'er her nose and cheek be shed
Flushing white and softened red;
Mingling tints, as when there glows
In snowy milk the bashful rose.
Then her lip, so rich in blisses,
Sweet petitioner for kisses,
Rosy nest, where lurks Persuasion,
Mutely courting Love's invasion.
Next, beneath the velvet chin,
Whose dimple hides a Love within,
Mould her neck with grace descending,
In a heaven of beauty ending;
While countless charms, above, below,
Sport and flutter round its snow.
Now let a floating, lucid veil,
Shadow her form, but not conceal;[3]
A charm may peep, a hue may beam
And leave the rest to Fancy's dream.
Enough--'tis she! 'tis all I seek;
It glows, it lives, it soon will speak!


[1] This ode and the next may be called companion-pictures; they are
highly finished, and give us an excellent idea of the taste of the
ancients in beauty.

[2] The ancients have been very enthusiastic in their praises of the
beauty of hair. Apuleius, in the second book of his Milesiacs, says that
Venus herself, if she were bald, though surrounded by the Graces and the
Loves, could not be pleasing even to her husband Vulcan.

[3] This delicate art of description, which leaves imagination to complete
the picture, has been seldom adopted in the imitations of this beautiful
poem. Ronsard is exceptionally minute; and Politianus, in his charming
portrait of a girl, full of rich and exquisite diction, has lifted the
veil rather too much. The "_questa che tu m'intendi_" should be always
left to fancy.






ODE XVII.


And now with all thy pencil's truth,
Portray Bathyllus, lovely youth!
Let his hair, in masses bright,
Fall like floating rays of light;
And there the raven's die confuse
With the golden sunbeam's hues.
Let no wreath, with artful twine.
The flowing of his locks confine;
But leave them loose to every breeze,
To take what shape and course they please.
Beneath the forehead, fair as snow,
But flushed with manhood's early glow,
And guileless as the dews of dawn,
Let the majestic brows be drawn,
Of ebon hue, enriched by gold,
Such as dark, shining snakes unfold.
Mix in his eyes the power alike,
With love to win, with awe to strike;
Borrow from Mars his look of ire,
From Venus her soft glance of fire;
Blend them in such expression here,
That we by turns may hope and fear!

Now from the sunny apple seek
The velvet down that spreads his cheek;
And there, if art so far can go,
The ingenuous blush of boyhood show.
While, for his mouth--but no,--in vain
Would words its witching charm explain.
Make it the very seat, the throne,
That Eloquence would claim her own;
And let the lips, though silent, wear
A life-look, as if words were there.

Next thou his ivory neck must trace,
Moulded with soft but manly grace;
Fair as the neck of Paphia's boy,
Where Paphia's arms have hung in joy.
Give him the wingd Hermes' hand,
With which he waves his snaky wand;
Let Bacchus the broad chest supply,
And Leda's son the sinewy thigh;
While, through his whole transparent frame,
Thou show'st the stirrings of that flame,
Which kindles, when the first love-sigh
Steals from the heart, unconscious why.

But sure thy pencil, though so bright,
Is envious of the eye's delight,
Or its enamoured touch would show
The shoulder, fair as sunless snow,
Which now in veiling shadow lies,
Removed from all but Fancy's eyes.
Now, for his feet--but hold--forbear--
I see the sun-god's portrait there:[1]
Why paint Bathyllus? when in truth,
There, in that god, thou'st sketched the youth.
Enough--let this bright form be mine,
And send the boy to Samos' shrine;
Phoebus shall then Bathyllus be,
Bathyllus then, the deity!


[1] The abrupt turn here is spirited, but requires some explanation. While
the artist is pursuing the portrait of Bathyllus, Anacreon, we must
suppose, turns around and sees a picture of Apollo, which was intended for
an altar at Samos. He then instantly tells the painter to cease his work;
that this picture will serve for Bathyllus; and that, when he goes to
Samos, he may make an Apollo of the portrait of the boy which he had
begun.






ODE XVIII.


Now the star of day is high,
Fly, my girls, in pity fly.
Bring me wine in brimming urns
Cool my lip, it burns, it burns!
Sunned by the meridian fire,
Panting, languid I expire,
Give me all those humid flowers,
Drop them o'er my brow in showers.
Scarce a breathing chaplet now
Lives upon my feverish brow;
Every dewy rose I wear
Sheds its tears, and withers there.[1]
But to you, my burning heart,
What can now relief impart?
Can brimming bowl, or floweret's dew,
Cool the flame that scorches you?


[1] In the poem of Mr. Sheridan's, "Uncouth is this moss-covered grotto of
stone," there is an idea very singularly coincident with this of
Angerianus:--

  And thou, stony grot, in thy arch may'st preserve
  Some lingering drops of the night-fallen dew:
  Let them fall on her bosom of snow, and they'll serve
  As tears of my sorrow entrusted to you.






ODE XIX.[1]


Here recline you, gentle maid,
Sweet is this embowering shade;
Sweet the young, the modest trees,
Ruffled by the kissing breeze;
Sweet the little founts that weep,
Lulling soft the mind to sleep;
Hark! they whisper as they roll,
Calm persuasion to the soul;
Tell me, tell me, is not this
All a stilly scene of bliss?
"Who, my girl, would pass it by?
Surely neither you nor I."


[1] The description of this bower is so natural and animated, that we
almost feel a degree of coolness and freshness while we peruse it.






ODE XX.[1]


One day the Muses twined the hands
Of infant Love with flowery bands;
And to celestial Beauty gave
The captive infant for her slave.
His mother comes, with many a toy,
To ransom her beloved boy;[2]
His mother sues, but all in vain,--
He ne'er will leave his chains again.
Even should they take his chains away,
The little captive still would stay.
"If this," he cries, "a bondage be,
Oh, who could wish for liberty?"


[1] The poet appears, in this graceful allegory, to describe the softening
influence which poetry holds over the mind, in making it peculiarly
susceptible to the impressions of beauty.

[2] In the first idyl of Moschus, Venus there proclaims the reward for her
fugitive child:--

  On him, who the haunts of my Cupid can show,
  A kiss of the tenderest stamp I'll bestow;
  But he, who can bring back the urchin in chains,
  Shall receive even something more sweet for his pains.






ODE XXI.[1]


Observe when mother earth is dry,
She drinks the droppings of the sky;
And then the dewy cordial gives
To every thirsty plant that lives.
The vapors, which at evening weep,
Are beverage to the swelling deep;
And when the rosy sun appears,
He drinks the ocean's misty tears.
The moon too quaffs her paly stream
Of lustre, from the solar beam.
Then, hence with all your sober thinking!
Since Nature's holy law is drinking;
I'll make the laws of nature mine,
And pledge the universe in wine.


[1] Those critics who have endeavored to throw the chains of precision
over the spirit of this beautiful trifle, require too much from
Anacreontic philosophy. Among others, Gail very sapiently thinks that the
poet uses the epithet [Greek: melainae], because black earth absorbs
moisture more quickly than any other; and accordingly he indulges us with
an experimental disquisition on the subject.--See Gail's Notes.






ODE XXII.


The Phrygian rock, that braves the storm,
Was once a weeping matron's form;[1]
And Progne, hapless, frantic maid,
Is now a swallow in the shade.
Oh! that a mirror's form were mine,
That I might catch that smile divine;
And like my own fond fancy be,
Reflecting thee, and only thee;
Or could I be the robe which holds
That graceful form within its folds;
Or, turned into a fountain, lave
Thy beauties in my circling wave.
Would I were perfume for thy hair,
To breathe my soul in fragrance there;
Or, better still, the zone, that lies
Close to thy breast, and feels its sighs![2]
Or even those envious pearls that show
So faintly round that neck of snow--
Yes, I would be a happy gem,
Like them to hang, to fade like them.
What more would thy Anacreon be?
Oh, any thing that touches thee;
Nay, sandals for those airy feet--
Even to be trod by them were sweet!


[1] The compliment of this ode is exquisitely delicate, and so singular
for the period in which Anacreon lived, when the scale of love had not yet
been graduated Into all its little progressive refinements, that if we
were inclined to question the authenticity of the poem, we should find a
much more plausible argument in the features of modern gallantry which it
bears, than in any of those fastidious conjectures upon which some
commentators have presumed so far.

[2] The women of Greece not only wore this zone, but condemned themselves
to fasting, and made use of certain drugs and powders for the same
purpose. To these expedients they were compelled, in consequence of their
inelegant fashion of compressing the waist into a very narrow compass,
which necessarily caused an excessive tumidity in the bosom. See
"Dioscorides," lib. v.






ODE XXIII.


I often wish this languid lyre,
This warbler of my soul's desire,
Could raise the breath of song sublime,
To men of fame, in former time.
But when the soaring theme I try,
Along the chords my numbers die,
And whisper, with dissolving tone,
"Our sighs are given to love alone!"
Indignant at the feeble lay,
I tore the panting chords away,
Attuned them to a nobler swell,
And struck again the breathing shell;
In all the glow of epic fire,
To Hercules I wake the lyre,
But still its fainting sighs repeat,
"The tale of love alone is sweet!"
Then fare thee well, seductive dream,
That madest me follow Glory's theme;
For thou my lyre, and thou my heart,
Shall never more in spirit part;
And all that one has felt so well
The other shall as sweetly tell!






ODE XXIV.


To all that breathe the air of heaven,
Some boon of strength has Nature given.
In forming the majestic bull,
She fenced with wreathed horns his skull;
A hoof of strength she lent the steed,
And winged the timorous hare with speed.
She gave the lion fangs of terror,
And, o'er the ocean's crystal mirror,
Taught the unnumbered scaly throng
To trace their liquid path along;
While for the umbrage of the grove,
She plumed the warbling world of love.

To man she gave, in that proud hour,
The boon of intellectual power.
Then, what, oh woman, what, for thee,
Was left in Nature's treasury?
She gave thee beauty--mightier far
Than all the pomp and power of war.
Nor steel, nor fire itself hath power
Like woman, in her conquering hour.
Be thou but fair, mankind adore thee,
Smile, and a world is weak before thee![1]


[1] Longepierre's remark here is ingenious; "The Romans," says he, "were
so convinced of the power of beauty, that they used a word implying
strength in the place of the epithet beautiful".






ODE XXV.


Once in each revolving year,
Gentle bird! we find thee here.
When Nature wears her summer-vest,
Thou comest to weave thy simple nest;
But when the chilling winter lowers.
Again thou seekest the genial bowers
Of Memphis, or the shores of Nile,
Where sunny hours for ever smile.
And thus thy pinion rests and roves,--
Alas! unlike the swarm of Loves,
That brood within this hapless breast,
And never, never change their nest!
Still every year, and all the year,
They fix their fated dwelling here;
And some their infant plumage try,
And on a tender winglet fly;
While in the shell, impregned with fires,
Still lurk a thousand more desires;
Some from their tiny prisons peeping,
And some in formless embryo sleeping.
Thus peopled, like the vernal groves,
My breast resounds, with warbling Loves;
One urchin imps the other's feather,
Then twin-desires they wing together,
And fast as they thus take their flight,
Still other urchins spring to light.
But is there then no kindly art,
To chase these Cupids from my heart;
Ah, no! I fear, in sadness fear,
They will for ever nestle here!






ODE XXVI.


Thy harp may sing of Troy's alarms,
Or tell the tale of Theban arms;
With other wars my song shall burn,
For other wounds my harp shall mourn.
'Twas not the crested warrior's dart,
That drank the current of my heart;
Nor naval arms, nor mailed steed,
Have made this vanquished bosom bleed;
No--'twas from eyes of liquid blue,
A host of quivered Cupids flew;[1]
And now my heart all bleeding lies
Beneath that army of the eyes!


[1] The poets abound with conceits on the archery of the eyes, but few
have turned the thought so naturally as Anacreon. Ronsard gives to the
eyes of his mistress _un petit camp d'amours_.






ODE XXVII.


We read the flying courser's name
Upon his side, in marks of flame;
And, by their turbaned brows alone,
The warriors of the East are known.
But in the lover's glowing eyes,
The inlet to his bosom lies;
Through them we see the small faint mark,
Where Love has dropt his burning spark!






ODE XXVIII.


As, by his Lemnian forge's flame,
The husband of the Paphian dame
Moulded the glowing steel, to form
Arrows for Cupid, thrilling warm;
And Venus, as he plied his art,
Shed honey round each new-made dart,
While Love, at hand, to finish all,
Tipped every arrow's point with gall;
It chanced the Lord of Battles came
To visit that deep cave of flame.
'Twas from the ranks of war he rushed,
His spear with many a life-drop blushed;
He saw the fiery darts, and smiled
Contemptuous at the archer-child.
"What!" said the urchin, "dost thou smile?
Here, hold this little dart awhile,
And thou wilt find, though swift of flight,
My bolts are not so feathery light."

  Mars took the shaft--and, oh, thy look,
Sweet Venus, when the shaft he took!--
Sighing, he felt the urchin's art,
And cried, in agony of heart,
"It is not light--I sink with pain!
Take--take thy arrow back again."
"No," said the child, "it must not be;
That little dart was made for thee!"






ODE XXIX.


Yes--loving is a painful thrill,
And not to love more painful still
But oh, it is the worst of pain,
To love and not be loved again!
Affection now has fled from earth,
Nor fire of genius, noble birth,
Nor heavenly virtue, can beguile,
From beauty's cheek one favoring smile.
Gold is the woman's only theme,
Gold is the woman's only dream.
Oh! never be that wretch forgiven--
Forgive him not, indignant heaven!
Whose grovelling eyes could first adore,
Whose heart could pant for sordid ore.
Since that devoted thirst began,
Man has forgot to feel for man;
The pulse of social life is dead,
And all its fonder feelings fled!
War too has sullied Nature's charms,
For gold provokes the world to arms;
And oh! the worst of all its arts,
It renders asunder loving hearts.






ODE XXX.[1]


'Twas in a mocking dream of night--
I fancied I had wings as light
As a young birds, and flew as fleet;
While Love, around whose beauteous feet,
I knew not why, hung chains of lead,
Pursued me, as I trembling fled;
And, strange to say, as swift as thought,
Spite of my pinions, I was caught!
What does the wanton Fancy mean
By such a strange, illusive scene?
I fear she whispers to my breast,
That you, sweet maid, have stolen its rest;
That though my fancy, for a while,
Hath hung on many a woman's smile,
I soon dissolved each passing vow,
And ne'er was caught by love till now!


[1] Barnes imagines from this allegory, that our poet married very late in
life. But I see nothing in the ode which alludes to matrimony, except it
be the lead upon the feet of Cupid; and I agree in the opinion of Madame
Dacier, in her life of the poet, that he was always too fond of pleasure
to marry.






ODE XXXI.[1]


Armed with hyacinthine rod,
(Arms enough for such a god,)
Cupid bade me wing my pace,
And try with him the rapid race.
O'er many a torrent, wild and deep,
By tangled brake and pendent steep.
With weary foot I panting flew,
Till my brow dropt with chilly dew.
And now my soul, exhausted, dying,
To my lip was faintly flying;
And now I thought the spark had fled,
When Cupid hovered o'er my head,
And fanning light his breezy pinion,
Rescued my soul from death's dominion;[2]
Then said, in accents half-reproving.
"Why hast thou been a foe to loving?"


[1] The design of this little fiction is to intimate, that much greater
pain attends insensibility than can ever result from the tenderest
impressions of love.

[2] "The facility with which Cupid recovers him, signifies that the sweets
of love make us easily forget any solicitudes which he may occasion."--LA
FOSSE.






ODE XXXII.[1]


Strew me a fragrant bed of leaves,
Where lotus with the myrtle weaves;
And while in luxury's dream I sink,
Let me the balm of Bacchus drink!
In this sweet hour of revelry
Young Love shall my attendant be--
Drest for the task, with tunic round
His snowy neck and shoulders bound,
Himself shall hover by my side,
And minister the racy tide!

  Oh, swift as wheels that kindling roll,
Our life is hurrying to the goal;
A scanty dust, to feed the wind,
Is all the trace 'twill leave behind.
Then wherefore waste the rose's bloom
Upon the cold, insensate tomb?
Can flowery breeze, or odor's breath,
Affect the still, cold sense of death?
Oh no; I ask no balm to steep
With fragrant tears my bed of sleep:
But now, while every pulse is glowing,
Now let me breathe the balsam flowing;
Now let the rose, with blush of fire,
Upon my brow in sweets expire;
And bring the nymph whose eye hath power
To brighten even death's cold hour.
Yes, Cupid! ere my shade retire,
To join the blest elysian choir;
With wine, and love, and social cheer,
I'll make my own elysium here!


[1] We here have the poet, in his true attributes, reclining upon myrtles,
with Cupid for his cup-bearer. Some interpreters have ruined the picture
by making [Greek: Eros] the name of his slave. None but Love should fill
the goblet of Anacreon. Sappho, in one of her fragments, has assigned this
office to Venus.

  Hither, Venus, queen of kisses.
  This shall be the night of blisses;
  This the night, to friendship dear.
  Thou shalt be our Hebe here.
  Fill the golden brimmer high,
  Let it sparkle like thine eye;
  Bid the rosy current gush.
  Let it mantle like thy blush.
  Goddess, hast thou e'er above
  Seen a feast so rich in love?
  Not a soul that is not mine!
  Not a soul that is not thine!






ODE XXXIII.


'Twas noon of night, when round the pole
The sullen Bear is seen to roll;
And mortals, wearied with the day,
Are slumbering all their cares away;
An infant, at that dreary hour,
Came weeping to my silent bower,
And waked me with a piteous prayer,
To shield him from the midnight air.
"And who art thou," I waking cry,
"That bid'st my blissful visions fly?"
"Ah, gentle sire!" the infant said,
"In pity take me to thy shed;
Nor fear deceit; a lonely child
I wander o'er the gloomy wild.
Chill drops the rain, and not a ray
Illumes the drear and misty way!"

  I heard the baby's tale of woe:
I heard the bitter night-winds blow;
And sighing for his piteous fate,
I trimmed my lamp and oped the gate.
'Twas Love! the little wandering sprite,
His pinion sparkled through the night,
I knew him by his bow and dart;
I knew him by my fluttering heart.
Fondly I take him in, and raise
The dying embers' cheering blaze;
Press from his dank and clinging hair
The crystals of the freezing air,
And in my hand and bosom hold
His little fingers thrilling cold.

  And now the embers' genial ray,
Had warmed his anxious fears away;
"I pray thee," said the wanton child,
(My bosom trembled as he smiled,)
"I pray thee let me try my bow,
For through the rain I've wandered so,
That much I fear the midnight shower
Has injured its elastic power."
The fatal bow the urchin drew;
Swift from the string the arrow flew;
As swiftly flew as glancing flame,
And to my inmost spirit came!
"Fare thee well," I heard him say
As laughing wild he winged away,
"Fare thee well, for now I know
The rain has not relaxt my bow;
It still can send a thrilling dart,
As thou shalt own with all thy heart!"






ODE XXXIV.[1]


Oh thou, of all creation blest,
Sweet insect, that delight'st to rest
Upon the wild wood's leafy tops,
To drink the dew that morning drops,
And chirp thy song with such a glee,
That happiest kings may envy thee.
Whatever decks the velvet field,
Whate'er the circling seasons yield,
Whatever buds, whatever blows,
For thee it buds, for thee it grows.
Nor yet art thou the peasant's fear,
To him thy friendly notes are dear;
For thou art mild as matin dew;
And still, when summer's flowery hue
Begins to paint the bloomy plain,
We hear thy sweet prophetic strain;
Thy sweet prophetic strain we hear,
And bless the notes and thee revere!
The Muses love thy shrilly tone;
Apollo calls thee all his own;
'Twas he who gave that voice to thee,
'Tis he who tunes thy minstrelsy.

  Unworn by age's dim decline,
The fadeless blooms of youth are thine.
Melodious insect, child of earth,
In wisdom mirthful, wise in mirth;
Exempt from every weak decay,
That withers vulgar frames away;
With not a drop of blood to stain,
The current of thy purer vein;
So blest an age is past by thee,
Thou seem'st--a little deity!


[1] In a Latin ode addressed to the grasshopper, Rapin has preserved some
of the thoughts of our author:--

  Oh thou, that on the grassy bed
  Which Nature's vernal hand has spread,
  Reclinest soft, and tunest thy song,
  The dewy herbs and leaves among!
  Whether thou lyest on springing flowers
  Drunk with the balmy morning-showers
  Or, etc.






ODE XXXV.[1]


Cupid once upon a bed
Of roses laid his weary head;
Luckless urchin not to see
Within the leaves a slumbering bee;
The bee awaked--with anger wild
The bee awaked, and stung the child.
Loud and piteous are his cries;
To Venus quick he runs, he flies;
"Oh mother!--I am wounded through--
I die with pain--in sooth I do!
Stung by some little angry thing,
Some serpent on a tiny wing--
A bee it was--for once, I know,
I heard a rustic call it so."
Thus he spoke, and she the while,
Heard him with a soothing smile;
Then said, "My infant, if so much
Thou feel the little wild-bee's touch,
How must the heart, ah, Cupid be,
The hapless heart that's stung by thee!"


[1] Theocritus has imitated this beautiful ode in his nineteenth idyl; but
is very inferior, I think, to his original, in delicacy of point and
navet of expression. Spenser, in one of his smaller compositions, has
sported more diffusely on the same subject. The poem to which I allude
begins thus:--

  Upon a day, as Love lay sweetly slumbering
    All in his mother's lap;
  A gentle bee, with his loud trumpet murmuring,
    About him flew by hap, etc.






ODE XXXVI.[1]


If hoarded gold possest the power
To lengthen life's too fleeting hour,
And purchase from the hand of death
A little span, a moment's breath,
How I would love the precious ore!
And every hour should swell my store;
That when death came, with shadowy pinion,
To waft me to his bleak dominion,
I might, by bribes, my doom delay,
And bid him call some distant day.
But, since not all earth's golden store
Can buy for us one bright hour more,
Why should we vainly mourn our fate,
Or sigh at life's uncertain date?
Nor wealth nor grandeur can illume
The silent midnight of the tomb.
No--give to others hoarded treasures--
Mine be the brilliant round of pleasures--
The goblet rich, the board of friends,
Whose social souls the goblet blends;[2]
And mine, while yet I've life to live,
Those joys that love alone can give.


[1] Fontenelle has translated this ode, in his dialogue between Anacreon
and Aristotle in the shades, where, on weighing the merits of both these
personages, he bestows the prize of wisdom upon the poet.

[2] The goblet rich, the board of friends.
    Whose social soul the goblet blends.

This communion Of friendship, which sweetened the bowl of Anacreon, has
not been forgotten by the author of the following scholium, where the
blessings of life are enumerated with proverbial simplicity:

  Of mortal blessing here the first is health,
    And next those charms by which the eye we move;
  The third is wealth, unwounding guiltless wealth,
    And then, sweet intercourse with those we love!






ODE XXXVII.


'Twas night, and many a circling bowl
Had deeply warmed my thirsty soul;
As lulled in slumber I was laid,
Bright visions o'er my fancy played.
With maidens, blooming as the dawn,
I seemed to skim the opening lawn;
Light, on tiptoe bathed in dew,
We flew, and sported as we flew!

  Some ruddy striplings, who lookt on--
With cheeks that like the wine-god's shone,
Saw me chasing, free and wild,
These blooming maids, and slyly smiled;
Smiled indeed with wanton glee,
Though none could doubt they envied me.
And still I flew--and now had caught
The panting nymphs, and fondly thought
To gather from each rosy lip
A kiss that Jove himself might sip--
When sudden all my dream of joys,
Blushing nymphs and laughing boys,
All were gone!--"Alas!" I said,
Sighing for the illusion fled,
"Again, sweet sleep, that scene restore,
Oh! let me dream it o'er and o'er!"[1]


[1] Dr. Johnson, in his preface to Shakespeare, animadverting upon the
commentators of that poet, who pretended, in every little coincidence of
thought, to detect an imitation of some ancient poet, alludes in the
following words to the line of Anacreon before us: "I have been told that
when Caliban, after a pleasing dream says, 'I cried to sleep again,' the
author imitates Anacreon, who had, like any other man, the same wish on
the same occasion."






ODE XXXVIII.


Let us drain the nectared bowl,
Let us raise the song of soul
To him, the god who loves so well
The nectared bowl, the choral swell;
The god who taught the sons of earth
To thread the tangled dance of mirth;
Him, who was nurst with infant Love,
And cradled in the Paphian grove;
Him, that the Snowy Queen of Charms
So oft has fondled in her arms.
Oh 'tis from him the transport flows,
Which sweet intoxication knows;
With him, the brow forgets its gloom,
And brilliant graces learn to bloom.

  Behold!--my boys a goblet bear,
Whose sparkling foam lights up the air.
Where are now the tear, the sigh?
To the winds they fly, they fly!
Grasp the bowl; in nectar sinking,
Man of sorrow, drown thy thinking!
Say, can the tears we lend to thought
In life's account avail us aught?
Can we discern with all our lore,
The path we've yet to journey o'er?
Alas, alas, in ways so dark,
'Tis only wine can strike a spark!

Then let me quaff the foamy tide,
And through the dance meandering glide;
Let me imbibe the spicy breath
Of odors chafed to fragrant death;
Or from the lips of love inhale
A more ambrosial, richer gale!
To hearts that court the phantom Care,
Let him retire and shroud him there;
While we exhaust the nectared bowl,
And swell the choral song of soul
To him, the god who loves so well
The nectared bowl, the choral swell!






ODE XXXIX.


How I love the festive boy,
Tripping through the dance of joy!
How I love the mellow sage,
Smiling through the veil of age!
And whene'er this man of years
In the dance of joy appears,
Snows may o'er his head be flung,
But his heart--his heart is young.






ODE XL.


I know that Heaven hath sent me here,
To run this mortal life's career;
The scenes which I have journeyed o'er,
Return no more--alas! no more!
And all the path I've yet to go,
I neither know nor ask to know.
Away, then, wizard Care, nor think
Thy fetters round this soul to link;
Never can heart that feels with me
Descend to be a slave to thee!
And oh! before the vital thrill,
Which trembles at my heart is still,
I'll gather Joy's luxuriant flowers,
And gild with bliss my fading hours;
Bacchus shall bid my winter bloom,
And Venus dance me to the tomb!






ODE XLI.

When Spring adorns the dewy scene,
How sweet to walk the velvet green,
And hear the west wind's gentle sighs,
As o'er the scented mead it flies!
How sweet to mark the pouting vine,
Ready to burst in tears of wine;
And with some maid, who breathes but love,
To walk, at noontide, through the grove,
Or sit in some cool, green recess--
Oh, is this not true happiness?






ODE XLII.[1]


Yes, be the glorious revel mine,
Where humor sparkles from the wine.
Around me, let the youthful choir
Respond to my enlivening lyre;
And while the red cup foams along,
Mingle in soul as well as song.
Then, while I sit, with flowerets crowned,
To regulate the goblets round.
Let but the nymph, our banquet's pride,
Be seated smiling by my side,
And earth has not a gift or power
That I would envy, in that hour.
Envy!--oh never let its blight
Touch the gay hearts met here tonight.
Far hence be slander's sidelong wounds,
Nor harsh dispute, nor discord's sounds
Disturb a scene, where all should be
Attuned to peace and harmony.

  Come, let us hear the harp's gay note
Upon the breeze inspiring float,
While round us, kindling into love,
Young maidens through the light dance move.
Thus blest with mirth, and love, and peace,
Sure such a life should never cease!


[1] The character of Anacreon is here very strikingly depicted. His love
of social, harmonized pleasures, is expressed with a warmth, amiable and
endearing.






ODE XLIII.


While our rosy fillets shed
Freshness o'er each fervid head,
With many a cup and many a smile
The festal moments we beguile.
And while the harp, impassioned flings
Tuneful rapture from its strings,[1]
Some airy nymph, with graceful bound,
Keeps measure to the music's sound;
Waving, in her snowy hand,
The leafy Bacchanalian wand,
Which, as the tripping wanton flies,
Trembles all over to her sighs.
A youth the while, with loosened hair,
Floating on the listless air,
Sings, to the wild harp's tender tone,
A tale of woe, alas, his own;
And oh, the sadness in his sigh.
As o'er his lips the accents die!
Never sure on earth has been
Half so bright, so blest a scene.
It seems as Love himself had come
To make this spot his chosen home;--[2]
And Venus, too, with all her wiles,
And Bacchus, shedding rosy smiles,
All, all are here, to hail with me
The Genius of Festivity!


[1] Respecting the barbiton a host of authorities may be collected, which,
after all, leave us ignorant of the nature of the instrument. There is
scarcely any point upon which we are so totally uninformed as the music of
the ancients. The authors extant upon the subject are, I imagine, little
understood; and certainly if one of their moods was a progression by
quarter-tones, which we are told was the nature of the enharmonic scale,
simplicity was by no means the characteristic of their melody; for this is
a nicety of progression of which modern music is not susceptible. The
invention of the barbiton is, by Athenaeus, attributed to Anacreon.

[2] The introduction of these deities to the festival is merely
allegorical. Madame Dacier thinks that the poet describes a masquerade,
where these deities were personated by the company in masks. The
translation will conform with either idea.






ODE XLIV.[1]


Buds of roses, virgin flowers,
Culled from Cupid's balmy bowers,
In the bowl of Bacchus steep,
Till with crimson drops they weep.
Twine the rose, the garland twine,
Every leaf distilling wine;
Drink and smile, and learn to think
That we were born to smile and drink.
Rose, thou art the sweetest flower
That ever drank the amber shower;
Rose, thou art the fondest child
Of dimpled Spring, the wood-nymph wild.
Even the Gods, who walk the sky,
Are amorous of thy scented sigh.
Cupid, too, in Paphian shades,
His hair with rosy fillets braids,
When with the blushing sister Graces,
The wanton winding dance he traces.
Then bring me, showers of roses bring,
And shed them o'er me while I sing.
Or while, great Bacchus, round thy shrine,
Wreathing my brow with rose and vine,
I lead some bright nymph through the dance,
Commingling soul with every glance!


[1] This spirited poem is a eulogy on the rose; and again, in the fifty-
fifth ode, we shall find our author rich in the praises of that flower. In
a fragment of Sappho, in the romance of Achilles Tatius, to which Barnes
refers us, the rose is fancifully styled "the eye of flowers;" and the
same poetess, in another fragment, calls the favors of the Muse "the roses
of the Pleria."






ODE XLV.


Within this goblet, rich and deep,
I cradle all my woes to sleep.
Why should we breathe the sigh of fear,
Or pour the unavailing tear?
For death will never heed the sigh,
Nor soften at the tearful eye;
And eyes that sparkle, eyes that weep,
Must all alike be sealed in sleep.
Then let us never vainly stray,
In search of thorns, from pleasure's way;
But wisely quaff the rosy wave,
Which Bacchus loves, which Bacchus gave;
And in the goblet, rich and deep,
Cradle our crying woes to sleep.






ODE XLVI.[1]


Behold, the young, the rosy Spring,
Gives to the breeze her scented wing:
While virgin Graces, warm with May;
Fling roses o'er her dewy way.
The murmuring billows of the deep
Have languished into silent sleep;
And mark! the flitting sea-birds lave
Their plumes in the reflecting wave;
While cranes from hoary winter fly
To flutter in a kinder sky.
Now the genial star of day
Dissolves the murky clouds away;
And cultured field, and winding stream,
Are freshly glittering in his beam.

  Now the earth prolific swells
With leafy buds and flowery bells;
Gemming shoots the olive twine,
Clusters ripe festoon the vine;
All along the branches creeping,
Through the velvet foliage peeping,
Little infant fruits we see,
Nursing into luxury.


[1] The fastidious affectation of some commentators has denounced this ode
as spurious. Degen pronounces the four last lines to be the patch-work of
some miserable versificator, and Brunck condemns the whole ode. It appears
to me, on the contrary, to be elegantly graphical: full of delicate
expressions and luxuriant imagery.






ODE XLVII.


'Tis true, my fading years decline,
Yet can I quaff the brimming wine,
As deep as any stripling fair,
Whose cheeks the flush of morning wear;
And if, amidst the wanton crew,
I'm called to wind the dance's clue,
Then shalt thou see this vigorous hand,
Not faltering on the Bacchant's wand,
But brandishing a rosy flask,
The only thyrsus e'er I'll ask![1]

  Let those, who pant for Glory's charms,
Embrace her in the field of arms;
While my inglorious, placid soul
Breathes not a wish beyond this bowl.
Then fill it high, my ruddy slave,
And bathe me in its brimming wave.
For though my fading years decay,
Though manhood's prime hath past away,
Like old Silenus, sire divine,
With blushes borrowed from my wine.
I'll wanton mid the dancing train,
And live my follies o'er again!


[1] Phornutus assigns as a reason for the consecration of the thyrsus to
Bacchus, that inebriety often renders the support of a stick very
necessary.






ODE XLVIII.


When my thirsty soul I steep,
Every sorrow's lulled to sleep.
Talk of monarchs! I am then
Richest, happiest, first of men;
Careless o'er my cup I sing,
Fancy makes me more than king;
Gives me wealthy Croesus' store,
Can I, can I wish for more?
On my velvet couch reclining,
Ivy leaves my brow entwining,[1]
While my soul expands with glee,
What are kings and crowns to me?
If before my feet they lay,
I would spurn them all away;
Arm ye, arm ye, men of might,
Hasten to the sanguine fight;
But let _me_, my budding vine!
Spill no other blood than thine.
Yonder brimming goblet see,
That alone shall vanquish me--
Who think it better, wiser far
To fall in banquet than in war,


[1] "The ivy was consecrated to Bacchus [says Montfaucon], because he
formerly lay hid under that tree, or as others will have it, because its
leaves resemble those of the vine." Other reasons for its consecration,
and the use of it in garlands at banquets, may be found in Longepierre,
Barnes, etc.






ODE XLIX.


When Bacchus, Jove's immortal boy,
The rosy harbinger of joy,
Who, with the sunshine of the bowl,
Thaws the winter of our soul--
When to my inmost core he glides,
And bathes it with his ruby tides,
A flow of joy, a lively heat,
Fires my brain, and wings my feet,
Calling up round me visions known
To lovers of the bowl alone.

  Sing, sing of love, let music's sound
In melting cadence float around,
While, my young Venus, thou and I
Responsive to its murmurs sigh.
Then, waking from our blissful trance,
Again we'll sport, again we'll dance.






ODE L.[1]


When wine I quaff, before my eyes
Dreams of poetic glory rise;[2]
And freshened by the goblet's dews,
My soul invokes the heavenly Muse,
When wine I drink, all sorrow's o'er;
I think of doubts and fears no more;
But scatter to the railing wind
Each gloomy phantom of the mind.
When I drink wine, the ethereal boy,
Bacchus himself, partakes my joy;
And while we dance through vernal bowers,
Whose every breath comes fresh from flowers,
In wine he makes my senses swim,
Till the gale breathes of naught but him!

  Again I drink,--and, lo, there seems
A calmer light to fill my dreams;
The lately ruffled wreath I spread
With steadier hand around my head;
Then take the lyre, and sing "how blest
The life of him who lives at rest!"
But then comes witching wine again,
With glorious woman in its train;
And, while rich perfumes round me rise,
That seem the breath of woman's sighs,
Bright shapes, of every hue and form.
Upon my kindling fancy swarm,
Till the whole world of beauty seems
To crowd into my dazzled dreams!
When thus I drink, my heart refines,
And rises as the cup declines;
Rises in the genial flow,
That none but social spirits know,
When, with young revellers, round the bowl,
The old themselves grow young in soul!
Oh, when I drink, true joy is mine,
There's bliss in every drop of wine.
All other blessings I have known,
I scarcely dared to call my own;
But this the Fates can ne'er destroy,
Till death o'ershadows all my joy.


[1] Faber thinks this ode spurious; but, I believe, he is singular in his
opinion. It has all the spirit of our author. Like the wreath which he
presented in the dream, "it smells of Anacreon."

[2] Anacreon is not the only one [says Longepierre] whom wine has inspired
with poetry. We find an epigram in the first book of the "Anthologia,"
which begins thus:--

  If with water you fill up your glasses,
    You'll never write anything wise;
  For wine's the true horse of Parnassus.
    Which carries a bard to the skies!






ODE LI.


Fly not thus my brow of snow,
Lovely wanton! fly not so.
Though the wane of age is mine,
Though youth's brilliant flush be thine,
Still I'm doomed to sigh for thee,
Blest, if thou couldst sigh for me!
See, in yonder flowery braid,
Culled for thee, my blushing maid,[1]
How the rose, of orient glow,
Mingles with the lily's snow;
Mark, how sweet their tints agree,
Just, my girl, like thee and me!


[1] In the same manner that Anacreon pleads for the whiteness of his
locks, from the beauty of the color in garlands, a shepherd, in
Theocritus, endeavors to recommend his black hair.






ODE LII.[1]


Away, away, ye men of rules,
What have I do with schools?
They'd make me learn, they'd make me think,
But would they make me love and drink?
Teach me this, and let me swim
My soul upon the goblet's brim;
Teach me this, and let me twine
Some fond, responsive heart to mine,
For, age begins to blanch my brow,
I've time for naught but pleasure now.

  Fly, and cool, my goblet's glow
At yonder fountain's gelid flow;
I'll quaff, my boy, and calmly sink
This soul to slumber as I drink.
Soon, too soon, my jocund slave,
You'll deck your master's grassy grave;
And there's an end--for ah, you know
They drink but little wine below!


[1] "This is doubtless the work of a more modern poet than Anacreon; for
at the period when he lived rhetoricians were not known."--DEGEN.

Though this ode is found in the Vatican manuscript, I am much inclined to
agree in this argument against its authenticity: for though the dawnings
of the art of rhetoric might already have appeared, the first who gave it
any celebrity was. Corax of Syracuse, and he flourished in the century
after Anacreon.






ODE LIII.


When I behold the festive train
Of dancing youth, I'm young again!
Memory wakes her magic trance,
And wings me lightly through the dance.
Come, Cybeba, smiling maid!
Cull the flower and twine the braid;
Bid the blush of summer's rose
Burn upon my forehead's snows;
And let me, while the wild and young
Trip the mazy dance along,
Fling my heap of years away,
And be as wild, as young as they.
Hither haste, some cordial, soul!
Help to my lips the brimming bowl;
And you shall see this hoary sage
Forget at once his locks and age.
He still can chant the festive hymn,
He still can kiss the goblet's brim;[1]
As deeply quaff, as largely fill,
And play the fool right nobly still.


[1] Wine is prescribed by Galen, as an excellent medicine for old men:
"_Quod frigidos et humbribus expletos calefaciut_," etc.; but Nature was
Anacreon's physician.

There is a proverb in Eriphus, as quoted by Athenaeus, which says, "that
wine makes an old man dance, whether he will or not."






ODE. LIV.[1]


Methinks, the pictured bull we see
Is amorous Jove--it must be he!
How fondly blest he seems to bear
That fairest of Phoenician fair!
How proud he breasts the foamy tide,
And spurns the billowy surge aside!
Could any beast of vulgar vein,
Undaunted thus defy the main?
No: he descends from climes above,
He looks the God, he breathes of Jove!


[1] "This ode is written upon., a picture which represented the rape, of
Europa."--MADAME DACIER.

It may probably have been a description of one of those coins, which the
Sidonians struck off in honor of Europa, representing a woman carried
across the sea by a bull. In the little treatise upon the goddess of
Syria, attributed very' falsely to Lucian, there is mention of this coin,
and of a temple dedicated by the Sidonians to Astarte, whom some, it
appears, confounded with Europa.






ODE LV.[1]


While we invoke the wreathed spring,
Resplendent rose! to thee we'll sing;
Resplendent rose, the flower of flowers,
Whose breath perfumes the Olympian bowers;
Whose virgin blush, of chastened dye,
Enchants so much our mortal eye.
When pleasure's spring-tide season glows.
The Graces love to wreathe the rose;
And Venus, in its fresh-blown leaves,
An emblem of herself perceives.
Oft hath the poet's magic tongue
The rose's fair luxuriance sung;
And long the Muses, heavenly maids,
Have reared it in their tuneful shades.
When, at the early glance of morn,
It sleeps upon the glittering thorn,
'Tis sweet to dare the tangled fence
To cull the timid floweret thence,
And wipe with tender hand away
The tear that on its blushes lay!
'Tis sweet to hold the infant stems,
Yet dropping with Aurora's gems,
And fresh inhale the spicy sighs
That from the weeping buds arise.

  When revel reigns, when mirth is high,
And Bacchus beams in every eye,
Our rosy fillets scent exhale,
And fill with balm the fainting gale.
There's naught in nature bright or gay,
Where roses do not shed their ray.
When morning paints the orient skies,
Her fingers burn with roseate dyes;[2]
Young nymphs betray; the Rose's hue,
O'er whitest arms it kindles thro'.
In Cytherea's form it glows,
And mingles with the living snows.

  The rose distils a healing balm,
The beating pulse of pain to calm;
Preserves the cold inurnd clay,[3]
And mocks the vestige of decay:
And when, at length, in pale decline,
Its florid beauties fade and pine,
Sweet as in youth, its balmy breath
Diffuses odor even in death!
Oh! whence could such a plant have sprung?
Listen,--for thus the tale is sung.
When, humid, from the silvery stream,
Effusing beauty's warmest beam,
Venus appeared, in flushing hues,
Mellowed by ocean's briny dews;
When, in the starry courts above,
The pregnant brain of mighty Jove
Disclosed the nymph of azure glance,
The nymph who shakes the martial lance;--
Then, then, in strange eventful hour,
The earth produced an infant flower,
Which sprung, in blushing glories drest.
And wantoned o'er its parent breast.
The gods beheld this brilliant birth,
And hailed the Rose, the boon of earth!
With nectar drops, a ruby tide,
The sweetly orient buds they dyed,[4]
And bade them bloom, the flowers divine
Of him who gave the glorious vine;
And bade them on the spangled thorn
Expand their bosoms to the morn.


[1] This ode is a brilliant panegyric on the rose. "All antiquity [says
Barnes] has produced nothing more beautiful."

From the idea of peculiar excellence, which the ancients attached to this
flower, arose a pretty proverbial expression, used by Aristophanes,
according to Suidas "You have spoken roses."

[2] In the original here, he enumerates the many epithets of beauty,
borrowed from roses, which were used by the poets. We see that poets were
dignified in Greece with the title of sages: even the careless Anacreon,
who lived but for love and voluptuousness, was called by Plato the wise
Anacreon--_fuit haec sapienta quondam_.

[3] He here alludes to the use of the rose in embalming; and, perhaps (as
Barnes thinks), to the rosy unguent with which Venus anointed the corpse
of Hector.

[4] The author of the "Pervigilium Veneris" (a poem attributed to
Catullus, the style of which appears to me to have all the labored
luxuriance of a much later period) ascribes the tincture of the rose to
the blood from the wound of Adonis.






ODE LVI.


He, who instructs the youthful crew
To bathe them in the brimmer's dew,
And taste, uncloyed by rich excesses,
All the bliss that wine possesses;
He, who inspires the youth to bound
Elastic through the dance's round,--
Bacchus, the god again is here,
And leads along the blushing year;
The blushing year with vintage teems,
Ready to shed those cordial streams,
Which, sparkling in the cup of mirth,
Illuminate the sons of earth![1]

Then, when the ripe and vermil wine,--
Blest infant of the pregnant vine,
Which now in mellow clusters swells,--
Oh! when it bursts its roseate cells,
Brightly the joyous stream shall flow,
To balsam every mortal woe!
None shall be then cast down or weak,
For health and joy shall light each cheek;
No heart will then desponding sigh,
For wine shall bid despondence fly.
Thus--till another autumn's glow
Shall bid another vintage flow.


[1] Madame Dacier thinks that the poet here had the nepenthe of Homer in
his mind. Odyssey, lib. iv. This nepenthe was a something of exquisite
charm, infused by Helen into the wine of her guests, which had the power
of dispelling every anxiety. A French writer, De Mere, conjectures that
this spell, which made the bowl so beguiling, was the charm of Helen's
conversation. See Bayle, art. Helne.






ODE LVII[1]


Whose was the artist hand that spread
Upon this disk the ocean's bed?
And, in a flight of fancy, high
As aught on earthly wing can fly,
Depicted thus, in semblance warm,
The Queen of Love's voluptuous form
Floating along the silvery sea
In beauty's naked majesty!
Oh! he hath given the enamoured sight
A witching banquet of delight,
Where, gleaming through the waters clear,
Glimpses of undreamt charms appear,
And all that mystery loves to screen,
Fancy, like Faith, adores unseen.[2]

Light as a leaf, that on the breeze
Of summer skims the glassy seas,
She floats along the ocean's breast,
Which undulates in sleepy rest;
While stealing on, she gently pillows
Her bosom on the heaving billows.
Her bosom, like the dew-washed rose,
Her neck, like April's sparkling snows,
Illume the liquid path she traces,
And burn within the stream's embraces.
Thus on she moves, in languid pride,
Encircled by the azure tide,
As some fair lily o'er a bed
Of violets bends its graceful head.

Beneath their queen's inspiring glance,
The dolphins o'er the green sea dance,
Bearing in triumph young Desire,
And infant Love with smiles of fire!
While, glittering through the silver waves,
The tenants of the briny caves
Around the pomp their gambols play,
And gleam along the watery way.


[1] This ode is a very animated description of a picture of Venus on a
discus, which represented the goddess in her first emergence from the
waves. About two centuries after our poet wrote, the pencil of the artist
Apelles embellished this subject, in his famous painting of the Venus
Anadyomene, the model of which, as Pliny informs us, was the beautiful
Campaspe, given to him by Alexander; though, according to Natalis Comes,
lib. vii. cap. 16., it was Phryne who sat to Apelles for the face and
breast of this Venus.

[2] The picture here has all the delicate character of the semi-reducta
Venus, and affords a happy specimen of what the poetry of passion
_ought_ to be--glowing but through a veil, and stealing upon the heart
from concealment. Few of the ancients have attained this modesty of
description, which, like the golden cloud that hung over Jupiter and Juno,
is impervious to every beam but that of fancy.






ODE LVIII.


When Gold, as fleet as zephyr's' pinion,
Escapes like any faithless minion,[1]
And flies me (as he flies me ever),[2]
Do I pursue him? never, never!
No, let the false deserter go,
For who would court his direst foe?
But when I feel my lightened mind
No more by grovelling gold confined,
Then loose I all such clinging cares,
And cast them to the vagrant airs.
Then feel I, too, the Muse's spell,
And wake to life the dulcet shell,
Which, roused once more, to beauty sings,
While love dissolves along the strings!

But, scarcely has my heart been taught
How little Gold deserves a thought,
When, lo! the slave returns once more,
And with him wafts delicious store
Of racy wine, whose genial art
In slumber seals the anxious heart.
Again he tries my soul to sever
From love and song, perhaps forever!

Away, deceiver! why pursuing
Ceaseless thus my heart's undoing?
Sweet is the song of amorous fire.
Sweet the sighs that thrill the lyre;
Oh! sweeter far than all the gold
Thy wings can waft, thy mines can hold.
Well do I know thy arts, thy wiles--
They withered Love's young wreathd smiles;
And o'er his lyre such darkness shed,
I thought its soul of song was fled!
They dashed the wine-cup, that, by him,
Was filled with kisses to the brim.[3]
Go--fly to haunts of sordid men,
But come not near the bard again.
Thy glitter in the Muse's shade,
Scares from her bower the tuneful maid;
And not for worlds would I forego
That moment of poetic glow,
When my full soul, in Fancy's stream,
Pours o'er the lyre, its swelling theme.
Away, away! to worldlings hence,
Who feel not this diviner sense;
Give gold to those who love that pest,--
But leave the poet poor and blest.


[1] There is a kind of pun in these words, as Madame Dacier has already
remarked; for Chrysos, which signifies gold, was also a frequent name for
a slave. In one of Lucian's dialogues, there is, I think, a similar play
upon the word, where the followers of Chrysippus are called golden fishes.
The puns of the ancients are, in general, even more vapid than our own;
some of the best are those recorded of Diogenes.

[2] This grace of iteration has already been taken notice of. Though
sometimes merely a playful beauty, it is peculiarly expressive of
impassioned sentiment, and we may easily believe that it was one of the
many sources of that energetic sensibility which breathed through the
style of Sappho.

[3] Horace has _Desiderique temperare poculum_, not figuratively, however,
like Anacreon, but importng the love-philtres of the witches. By "cups of
kisses" our poet may allude to a favorite gallantry among the ancients, of
drinking when the lips of their mistresses had touched the brim;--

  "Or leave a kiss within the cup And I'll not ask for wine."

As In Ben Jonson's translation from Philostratus; and Lucian has a conceit
upon the same idea, "that you may at once both drink and kiss."






ODE LIX.


Ripened by the solar beam,
Now the ruddy clusters teem,
In osier baskets borne along
By all the festal vintage throng
Of rosy youths and virgins fair,
Ripe as the melting fruits they bear.
Now, now they press the pregnant grapes,
And now the captive stream escapes,
In fervid tide of nectar gushing.
And for its bondage proudly blushing
While, round the vat's impurpled brim,
The choral song, the vintage hymn
Of rosy youths and virgins fair,
Steals on the charmed and echoing air.
Mark, how they drink, with all their eyes,
The orient tide that sparkling flies,
The infant Bacchus, born in mirth,
While Love stands by, to hail the birth.

When he, whose verging years decline
As deep into the vale as mine,
When he inhales the vintage-cup,
His feet, new-winged, from earth spring up,
And as he dances, the fresh air
Plays whispering through his silvery hair.
Meanwhile young groups whom love invites,
To joys even rivalling wine's delights,
Seek, arm in arm, the shadowy grove,
And there, in words and looks of love,
Such as fond lovers look and say,
Pass the sweet moonlight hours away.






ODE LX.[1]


Awake to life, my sleeping shell,
To Phoebus let thy numbers swell;
And though no glorious prize be thine,
No Pythian wreath around thee twine,
Yet every hour is glory's hour
To him who gathers wisdom's flower.
Then wake thee from thy voiceless slumbers,
And to the soft and Phrygian numbers,
Which, tremblingly, my lips repeat,
Send echoes, from thy chord as sweet.
'Tis thus the swan, with fading notes,
Down the Cayster's current floats,
While amorous breezes linger round,
And sigh responsive sound for sound.

Muse of the Lyre! illume my dream,
Thy Phoebus is my fancy's theme;
And hallowed is the harp I bear,
And hallowed is the wreath I wear,
Hallowed by him, the god of lays,
Who modulates the choral maze.
I sing the love which Daphne twined
Around the godhead's yielding mind;
I sing the blushing Daphne's flight
From this ethereal son of Light;
And how the tender, timid maid
Flew trembling to the kindly shade.
Resigned a form, alas, too fair,
Arid grew a verdant laurel there;
Whose leaves, with sympathetic thrill,
In terror seemed to tremble still!
The god pursued, with winged desire;
And when his hopes were all on fire,
And when to clasp the nymph he thought,
A lifeless tree was all he caught;
And 'stead of sighs that pleasure heaves,
Heard but the west-wind in the leaves!

But, pause, my soul, no more, no more--
Enthusiast, whither do I soar?
This sweetly-maddening dream of soul
Hath hurried me beyond the goal.
Why should I sing the mighty darts
Which fly to wound celestial hearts,
When ah, the song, with sweeter tone,
Can tell the darts that wound my own?
Still be Anacreon, still inspire
The descant of the Teian lyre:
Still let the nectared numbers float
Distilling love in every note!
And when some youth, whose glowing soul
Has felt the Paphian star's control,
When he the liquid lays shall hear,
His heart will flutter to his ear,
And drinking there of song divine,
Banquet on intellectual wine![2]


[1] This hymn to Apollo is supposed not to have been written by Anacreon;
and it is undoubtedly rather a sublimer flight than the Teian wing is
accustomed to soar. But in a poet of whose works so small a proportion has
reached us, diversity of style is by no means a safe criterion. If we knew
Horace but as a satirist, should we easily believe there could dwell such
animation in his lyre? Suidas says that our poet wrote hymns, and this
perhaps is one of them. We can perceive in what an altered and imperfect
state his works are at present, when we find a scholiast upon Horace
citing an ode from the third book of Anacreon.

[2] Here ends the last of the odes in the Vatican MS., whose authority
helps to confirm the genuine antiquity of them all, though a few have
stolen among the number, which we may hesitate in attributing to Anacreon.






ODE LXI.[1]


Youth's endearing charms are fled;
Hoary locks deform my head;
Bloomy graces, dalliance gay,
All the flowers of life decay.[2]
Withering age begins to trace
Sad memorials o'er my face;
Time has shed its sweetest bloom
All the future must be gloom.
This it is that sets me sighing;
Dreary is the thought of dying![3]
Lone and dismal is the road,
Down to Pluto's dark abode;
And, when once the journey's o'er,
Ah! we can return no more!


[1] The intrusion of this melancholy ode, among the careless levities of
our poet, reminds us of the skeletons which the Egyptians used to hang up
in the banquet-rooms, to inculcate a thought of mortality even amidst the
dissipations of mirth. If it were not for the beauty of its numbers, the
Teian Muse should disown this ode.

[2] Horace often, with feeling and elegance, deplores the fugacity of
human enjoyments.

[3] Regnier, a libertine French poet, has written some sonnets on the
approach of death, full of gloomy and trembling repentance. Chaulieu,
however, supports more consistently the spirit of the Epicurean
philosopher. See his poem, addressed to the Marquis de Lafare.






ODE LXII.[1]


Fill me, boy, as deep a draught,
As e'er was filled, as e'er was quaffed;
But let the water amply flow,
To cool the grape's intemperate glow;[2]
Let not the fiery god be single,
But with the nymphs in union mingle.
For though the bowl's the grave of sadness,
Ne'er let it be the birth of madness.
No, banish from our board tonight
The revelries of rude delight;
To Scythians leave these wild excesses,
Ours be the joy that soothes and blesses!
And while the temperate bowl we wreathe,
In concert let our voices breathe,
Beguiling every hour along
With harmony of soul and song.


[1] This ode consists of two fragments, which are to be found in
Athenaeus, book x., and which Barnes, from the similarity of their
tendency, has combined into one. I think this a very justifiable liberty,
and have adopted it in some other fragments of our poet.

[2] It was Amphictyon who first taught the Greeks to mix water with their
wine; in commemoration of which circumstance they erected altars to
Bacchus and the nymphs.






ODE LXIII.[1]


To Love, the soft and blooming child,
I touch the harp in descant wild;
To Love, the babe of Cyprian bowers,
The boy, who breathes and blushes flowers;
To Love, for heaven and earth adore him,
And gods and mortals bow before him!


[1] "This fragment is preserved in Clemens Alexandrinus, Storm, lib. vi.
and In Arsenius, Collect. Graec."--BARNES.

It appears to have been the opening of a hymn in praise of Love.






ODE LXIV.[1]


Haste thee, nymph, whose well-aimed spear
Wounds the fleeting mountain-deer!
Dian, Jove's immortal child,
Huntress of the savage wild!
Goddess with the sun-bright hair!
Listen to a people's prayer.
Turn, to Lethe's river turn,
There thy vanquished people mourn![2]
Come to Lethe's wavy shore,
Tell them they shall mourn no more.
Thine their hearts, their altars thine;
Must they, Dian--must they pine?


[1] This hymn to Diana is extant in Hephaestion. There is an anecdote of
our poet, which has led some to doubt whether he ever wrote any odes of
this kind. It is related by the Scholiast upon Pindar (Isthmionic. od. ii.
v. 1. as cited by Barnes) that Anaecreon being asked why he addressed all
his hymns to women, and none to the deities? answered, "Because women are
my deities."

I have assumed, it will be seen, in reporting this anecdote, the same
liberty which I have thought it right to take in translating some of the
odes; and it were to be wished that these little infidelities were always
allowable in interpreting the writings of the ancients.

[2] Lethe, a river of Iona, according to Strabo, falling into the Meander.
In its neighborhood was the city called Magnesia, in favor of whose
inhabitants our poet is supposed to have addressed this supplication to
Diana. It was written (as Madame Dacier conjectures) on the occasion of
some battle, in which the Magnesians had been defeated.






ODE LXV.[1]


Like some wanton filly sporting,
Maid Of Thrace, thou flyest my courting.
Wanton filly! tell me why
Thou trip'st away, with scornful eye,
And seem'st to think my doating heart
Is novice in the bridling art?
Believe me, girl, it is not so;
Thou'lt find this skilful hand can throw
The reins around that tender form,
However wild, however warm.
Yes--trust me I can tame thy force,
And turn and wind thee in the course.
Though, wasting now thy careless hours,
Thou sport amid the herbs and flowers,
Soon shalt thou feel the rein's control,
And tremble at the wished-for goal!


[1] This ode, which is addressed to some Thracian girl, exists in
Heraclides, and has been imitated very frequently by Horace, as all the
annotators have remarked. Madame Dacier rejects the allegory, which runs
so obviously through the poem, and supposes it to have been addressed to a
young mare belonging to Polycrates.

Pierius, in the fourth book of his "Hieroglyphics," cites this ode, and
informs us that the horse was the hieroglyphical emblem of pride.






ODE LXVI.[1]


To thee, the Queen of nymphs divine,
Fairest of all that fairest shine;
To thee, who rulest with darts of fire
This world of mortals, young Desire!
And oh! thou nuptial Power, to thee
Who bearest of life the guardian key,
Breathing my soul in fervent praise,
And weaving wild my votive lays,
For thee, O Queen! I wake the lyre,
For thee, thou blushing young Desire,
And oh! for thee, thou nuptial Power,
Come, and illume this genial hour.

  Look on thy bride, too happy boy,
And while thy lambent glance of joy
Plays over all her blushing charms,
Delay not, snatch her to thine arms,
Before the lovely, trembling prey,
Like a young birdling, wing away!
Turn, Stratocles, too happy youth,
Dear to the Queen of amorous truth,
And dear to her, whose yielding zone
Will soon resign her all thine own.
Turn to Myrilla, turn thine eye,
Breathe to Myrilla, breathe thy sigh.
To those bewitching beauties turn;
For thee they blush, for thee they burn.

  Not more the rose, the queen of flowers,
Outblushes all the bloom of bowers
Than she unrivalled grace discloses,
The sweetest rose, where all are roses.
Oh! may the sun, benignant, shed
His blandest influence o'er thy bed;
And foster there an infant tree,
To bloom like her, and tower like thee!


[1] This ode is introduced in the Romance of Theodorus Prodromus, and is
that kind of epithalamium which was sung like a scolium at the nuptial
banquet.






ODE LXVII.


Rich in bliss, I proudly scorn
The wealth of Amalthea's horn;
Nor should I ask to call the throne
Of the Tartessian prince my own;[1]
To totter through his train of years,
The victim of declining fears.
One little hour of joy to me
Is worth a dull eternity!


[1] He here alludes to Arganthonius, who lived, according to Lucian, an
hundred and fifty years; and reigned, according to Herodotus, eighty.






ODE LXVIII.


Now Neptune's month our sky deforms,
The angry night-cloud teems with storms;
And savage winds, infuriate driven,
Fly howling in the face of heaven!
Now, now, my friends, the gathering gloom
With roseate rays of wine illume:
And while our wreaths of parsley spread
Their fadeless foliage round our head,
Let's hymn the almighty power of wine,
And shed libations on his shrine!






ODE LXIX.


They wove the lotus band to deck
And fan with pensile wreath each neck;
And every guest, to shade his head,
Three little fragrant chaplets spread;[1]
And one was of the Egyptian leaf,
The rest were roses, fair and brief:
While from a golden vase profound,
To all on flowery beds around,
A Hebe, of celestial shape,
Poured the rich droppings of the grape!


[1] Longepierre, to give an idea of the luxurious estimation in which
garlands were held by the ancients, relates an anecdote of a courtezan,
who, in order to gratify three lovers, without leaving cause for Jealousy
with any of them, gave a kiss to one, let the other drink after her, and
put a garland on the brow of the third; so that each was satisfied with
his favor, and flattered himself with the preference.






ODE LXX.


A broken cake, with honey sweet,
Is all my spare and simple treat:
And while a generous bowl I crown
To float my little banquet down,
I take the soft, the amorous lyre,
And sing of love's delicious fire:
In mirthful measures warm and free,
I sing, dear maid, and sing for thee!






ODE LXXI.


With twenty chords my lyre is hung,
  And while I wake them all for thee,
Thou, O maiden, wild and young,
  Disportest in airy levity.

The nursling fawn, that in some shade
  Its antlered mother leaves behind,
Is not more wantonly afraid,
  More timid of the rustling wind!






ODE LXXII.


Fare thee well, perfidious maid,
My soul, too long on earth delayed,
Delayed, perfidious girl, by thee,
Is on the wing for liberty.
I fly to seek a kindlier sphere,
Since thou hast ceased to love me here!






ODE LXXIII.


Awhile I bloomed, a happy flower,
Till love approached one fatal hour,
And made my tender branches feel
The wounds of his avenging steel.
Then lost I fell, like some poor willow
That falls across the wintry billow!






ODE LXXIV.


Monarch Love, resistless boy,
With whom the rosy Queen of Joy,
And nymphs, whose eyes have Heaven's hue,
Disporting tread the mountain-dew;
Propitious, oh! receive my sighs,
Which, glowing with entreaty, rise
That thou wilt whisper to the breast
Of her I love thy soft behest:
And counsel her to learn from thee.
That lesson thou hast taught to me.
Ah! if my heart no flattery tell,
Thou'lt own I've learned that lesson well!






ODE LXXV.


Spirit of Love, whose locks unrolled,
Stream on the breeze like floating gold;
Come, within a fragrant cloud
Blushing with light, thy votary shroud;
And, on those wings that sparkling play,
Waft, oh, waft me hence away!
Love! my soul is full of thee,
Alive to all thy luxury.
But she, the nymph for whom I glow
The lovely Lesbian mocks my woe;
Smiles at the chill and hoary hues
That time upon my forehead strews.
Alas! I fear she keeps her charms,
In store for younger, happier arms!






ODE LXXVI.


Hither, gentle Muse of mine,
  Come and teach thy votary old
Many a golden hymn divine,
  For the nymph with vest of gold.

Pretty nymph, of tender age,
  Fair thy silky looks unfold;
Listen to a hoary sage,
  Sweetest maid with vest of gold!






ODE LXXVII.


Would that I were a tuneful lyre,
  Of burnished ivory fair,
Which, in the Dionysian choir,
  Some blooming boy should bear!

Would that I were a golden vase.
  That some bright nymph might hold
My spotless frame, with blushing grace,
  Herself as pure as gold!






ODE LXXVIII.


When Cupid sees how thickly now,
The snows of Time fall o'er my brow,
Upon his wing of golden light.
He passes with an eaglet's flight,
And flitting onward seems to say,
"Fare thee well, thou'st had thy day!"

Cupid, whose lamp has lent the ray,
That lights our life's meandering way,
That God, within this bosom stealing,
Hath wakened a strange, mingled feeling.
Which pleases, though so sadly teasing,
And teases, though so sweetly pleasing!

       *       *       *       *       *

Let me resign this wretched breath
  Since now remains to me
No other balm than kindly death,
  To soothe my misery!

       *       *       *       *       *

I know thou lovest a brimming measure,
  And art a kindly, cordial host;
But let me fill and drink at pleasure--
  Thus I enjoy the goblet most.

I fear that love disturbs my rest,
  Yet feel not love's impassioned care;
I think there's madness in my breast
  Yet cannot find that madness there!

       *       *       *       *       *

From dread Leucadia's frowning steep,
I'll plunge into the whitening deep:
And there lie cold, to death resigned,
Since Love intoxicates my mind!

       *       *       *       *       *

Mix me, child, a cup divine,
Crystal water, ruby wine;
Weave the frontlet, richly flushing
O'er my wintry temples blushing.
Mix the brimmer--Love and I
Shall no more the contest try.
Here--upon this holy bowl,
I surrender all my soul!








SONGS FROM THE GREEK ANTHOLOGY.






HERE AT THY TOMB.

BY MELEAGER.


Here, at thy tomb, these tears I shed,
  Tears, which though vainly now they roll,
Are all love hath to give the dead,
  And wept o'er thee with all love's soul;--

Wept in remembrance of that light.
  Which naught on earth, without thee, gives,
Hope of my heart! now quenched in night,
  But dearer, dead, than aught that lives.

Where is she? where the blooming bough
  That once my life's sole lustre made?
Torn off by death, 'tis withering now,
  And all its flowers in dust are laid.

Oh earth! that to thy matron breast
  Hast taken all those angel charms,
Gently, I pray thee, let her rest,--
  Gently, as in a mother's arms.






SALE OF CUPID.

BY MELEAGER.


Who'll buy a little boy? Look, yonder is he,
Fast asleep, sly rogue on his mother's knee;
So bold a young imp 'tisn't safe to keep,
So I'll part with him now, while he's sound asleep.
See his arch little nose, how sharp 'tis curled,
His wings, too, even in sleep unfurled;
And those fingers, which still ever ready are found
For mirth or for mischief, to tickle, or wound.

He'll try with his tears your heart to beguile,
But never you mind--he's laughing all the while;
For little he cares, so he has his own whim,
And weeping or laughing are all one to him.
His eye is as keen as the lightning's flash,
His tongue like the red bolt quick and rash;
And so savage is he, that his own dear mother
Is scarce more safe in his hands than another.

In short, to sum up this darling's praise,
He's a downright pest in all sorts of ways;
And if any one wants such an imp to employ,
He shall have a dead bargain of this little boy.
But see, the boy wakes--his bright tears flow--
His eyes seem to ask could I sell him? oh no,
Sweet child no, no--though so naughty you be,
You shall live evermore with my Lesbia and me.






TO WEAVE A GARLAND FOR THE ROSE.

BY PAUL, THE SILENTIARY.


To weave a garland for the rose.
  And think thus crown'd 'twould lovelier be,
Were far less vain than to suppose
  That silks and gems add grace to thee.
Where is the pearl whose orient lustre
  Would not, beside thee, look less bright?
What gold could match the glossy cluster
  Of those young ringlets full of light?

Bring from the land, where fresh it gleams,
  The bright blue gem of India's mine,
And see how soon, though bright its beams,
  'Twill pale before one glance of thine:
Those lips, too, when their sounds have blest us
  With some divine, mellifluous air,
Who would not say that Beauty's cestus
  Had let loose all its witcheries there?

Here, to this conquering host of charms
  I now give up my spell-bound heart.
Nor blush to yield even Reason's arms,
  When thou her bright-eyed conqueror art.
Thus to the wind all fears are given;
  Henceforth those eyes alone I see.
Where Hope, as in her own blue heaven,
  Sits beckoning me to bliss and thee!






WHY DOES SHE SO LONG DELAY?

BY PAUL, THE SILENTIARY.


Why does she so long delay?
  Night is waning fast away;
Thrice have I my lamp renewed,
  Watching here in solitude,
Where can she so long delay?
  Where, so long delay?

Vainly now have two lamps shone;
  See the third is nearly gone:
Oh that Love would, like the ray
  Of that weary lamp, decay!
But no, alas, it burns still on,
  Still, still, burns on.

Gods, how oft the traitress dear
  Swore, by Venus, she'd be here!
But to one so false as she
  What is man or deity?
Neither doth this proud one fear,--
  No, neither doth she fear.






TWIN'ST THOU WITH LOFTY WREATH THY BROW?

BY PAUL, THE SILENTIARY.


Twin'st thou with lofty wreath thy brow?
  Such glory then thy beauty sheds,
I almost think, while awed I bow
  'Tis Rhea's self before me treads.
Be what thou wilt,--this heart
Adores whate'er thou art!

Dost thou thy loosened ringlets leave,
  Like sunny waves to wander free?
Then, such a chain of charms they weave,
  As draws my inmost soul from me.
Do what thou wilt,--I must
Be charm'd by all thou dost!

Even when, enwrapt in silvery veils,
  Those sunny locks elude the sight,--
Oh, not even then their glory fails
  To haunt me with its unseen light.
Change as thy beauty may,
It charms in every way.

For, thee the Graces still attend,
  Presiding o'er each new attire,
And lending every dart they send
  Some new, peculiar touch of fire,
Be what thou wilt,--this heart
  Adores what'er thou art!






WHEN THE SAD WORD.

BY PAUL, THE SILENTIARY.


When the sad word, "Adieu," from my lip is nigh falling,
  And with it, Hope passes away,
Ere the tongue hath half breathed it, my fond heart recalling
  That fatal farewell, bids me stay,
For oh! 'tis a penance so weary
  One hour from thy presence to be,
That death to this soul were less dreary,
  Less dark than long absence from thee.

Thy beauty, like Day, o'er the dull world breaking.
  Brings life to the heart it shines o'er,
And, in mine, a new feeling of happiness waking,
  Made light what was darkness before.
But mute is the Day's sunny glory,
While thine hath a voice, on whose breath,
  More sweet than the Syren's sweet story,
My hopes hang, through life and through death!






MY MOPSA IS LITTLE.

BY PHILODEMUS.


My Mopsa is little, my Mopsa is brown,
But her cheek is as smooth as the peach's soft down,
  And, for blushing, no rose can come near her;
In short, she has woven such nets round my heart,
That I ne'er from my dear little Mopsa can part,--
  Unless I can find one that's dearer.

Her voice hath a music that dwells on the ear,
And her eye from its orb gives a daylight so clear,
  That I'm dazzled whenever I meet her;
Her ringlets, so curly, are Cupid's own net,
And her lips, oh their sweetness I ne'er shall forget--
  Till I light upon lips that are sweeter.

But 'tis not her beauty that charms me alone,
'Tis her mind, 'tis that language whose eloquent tone
  From the depths of the grave could revive one:
In short, here I swear, that if death were her doom,
I would instantly join my dead love in the tomb--
 Unless I could meet with a live






STILL, LIKE DEW IN SILENCE FALLING.

BY MELEAGER.


Still, like dew in silence falling,
  Drops for thee the nightly tear
Still that voice the past recalling,
  Dwells, like echo, on my ear,
    Still, still!

Day and night the spell hangs o'er me,
  Here forever fixt thou art:
As thy form first shone before me,
  So 'tis graven on this heart,
    Deep, deep!

Love, oh Love, whose bitter sweetness,
  Dooms me to this lasting pain.
Thou who earnest with so much fleetness,
Why so slow to go again?
  Why? why?






UP, SAILOR BOY, 'TIS DAY.


Up, sailor boy, 'tis day!
  The west wind blowing,
  The spring tide flowing,
Summon thee hence away.
Didst thou not hear yon soaring swallow sing?
Chirp, chirp,--in every note he seemed to say
'Tis Spring, 'tis Spring.
Up boy, away,--
Who'd stay on land to-day?
  The very flowers
  Would from their bowers
Delight to wing away!

Leave languid youths to pine
  On silken pillows;
  But be the billows
Of the great deep thine.
Hark, to the sail the breeze sings, "Let us fly;"
While soft the sail, replying to the breeze,
Says, with a yielding sigh,
"Yes, where you; please."
Up, boy, the wind, the ray,
  The blue sky o'er thee,
  The deep before thee,
All cry aloud, "Away!"






IN MYRTLE WREATHS.

BY ALCAEUS.


In myrtle wreaths my votive sword I'll cover,
  Like them of old whose one immortal blow
Struck off the galling fetters that hung over
  Their own bright land, and laid her tyrant low.
Yes, loved Harmodius, thou'rt undying;
  Still midst the brave and free,
In isles, o'er ocean lying,
  Thy home shall ever be.

In myrtle leaves my sword shall hide its lightning,
  Like his, the youth, whose ever-glorious blade
Leapt forth like flame, the midnight banquet brightening;'
  And in the dust a despot victim laid.
Blest youths; how bright in Freedom's story
  Your wedded names shall be;
A tyrant's death your glory,
  Your meed, a nation free!








JUVENILE POEMS.

1801.




TO JOSEPH ATKINSON, ESQ.

MY DEAR SIR,


I feel a very sincere pleasure in dedicating to you the Second Edition of
our friend LITTLE'S Poems. I am not unconscious that there are many in the
collection which perhaps it would be prudent to have altered or omitted;
and, to say the truth, I more than once revised them for that purpose;
but, I know not why, I distrusted either my heart or my judgment; and the
consequence is you have them in their original form:

   _non possunt nostros multae, Faustine, liturae
        emendare jocos; una litura potest_.

I am convinced, however, that, though not quite a _casuiste relch_, you
have charity enough to forgive such inoffensive follies: you know that the
pious Beza was not the less revered for those sportive Juvenilia which he
published under a fictitious name; nor did the levity of Bembo's poems
prevent him from making a very good cardinal.

Believe me, my dear friend.

With the truest esteem,

Yours,

T. M.

_April 19, 1802_






JUVENILE POEMS






FRAGMENTS OF COLLEGE EXERCISES.


    _Nobilitas sola est atque unica virtus_.--JUV.


Mark those proud boasters of a splendid line,
Like gilded ruins, mouldering while they shine,
How heavy sits that weight, of alien show,
Like martial helm upon an infant's brow;
Those borrowed splendors whose contrasting light
Throws back the native shades in deeper night.

Ask the proud train who glory's train pursue,
Where are the arts by which that glory grew?
The genuine virtues with that eagle-gaze
Sought young Renown in all her orient blaze!
Where is the heart by chymic truth refined,
The exploring soul whose eye had read mankind?
Where are the links that twined, with heavenly art,
His country's interest round the patriot's heart?

       *       *       *       *       *

    _Justum bellum quibus necessarium, et pia arma quibus nulla nisi in
    armis relinquitur spes_.--LIVY.

       *       *       *       *       *

Is there no call, no consecrating cause
Approved by Heav'n, ordained by nature's laws,
Where justice flies the herald of our way,
And truth's pure beams upon the banners play?

Yes, there's a call sweet as an angel's breath
To slumbering babes or innocence in death;
And urgent as the tongue of Heaven within,
When the mind's balance trembles upon sin.

Oh! 'tis our country's voice, whose claim should meet
An echo in the soul's most deep retreat;
Along the heart's responding chords should run,
Nor let a tone there vibrate--but the one!






VARIETY.


Ask what prevailing, pleasing power
  Allures the sportive, wandering bee
To roam untired, from flower to flower,
  He'll tell you, 'tis variety.

Look Nature round; her features trace,
  Her seasons, all her changes see;
And own, upon Creation's face,
  The greatest charm's variety.

For me, ye gracious powers above!
  Still let me roam, unfixt and free;
In all things,--but the nymph I love
  I'll change, and taste variety.

But, Patty, not a world of charms
  Could e'er estrange my heart from thee;--
No, let me ever seek those arms.
  There still I'll find variety.






TO A BOY, WITH A WATCH,

WRITTEN FOR A FRIEND


Is it not sweet, beloved youth,
  To rove through Erudition's bowers,
And cull the golden fruits of truth,
  And gather Fancy's brilliant flowers?

And is it not more sweet than this,
  To feel thy parents' hearts approving,
And pay them back in sums of bliss
  The dear, the endless debt of loving?

It must be so to thee, my youth;
  With this idea toil is lighter;
This sweetens all the fruits of truth,
  And makes the flowers of fancy brighter.

The little gift we send thee, boy,
  May sometimes teach thy soul to ponder,
If indolence or siren joy
  Should ever tempt that soul to wander.

'Twill tell thee that the wingd day
  Can, ne'er be chain'd by man's endeavor;
That life and time shall fade away,
  While heaven and virtue bloom forever!






SONG.


If I swear by that eye, you'll allow,
  Its look is so shifting and new,
That the oath I might take on it now
  The very next glance would undo.

Those babies that nestle so sly
  Such thousands of arrows have got,
That an oath, on the glance of an eye
  Such as yours, may be off in a shot.

Should I swear by the dew on your lip,
  Though each moment the treasure renews,
If my constancy wishes to trip,
  I may kiss off the oath when I choose.

Or a sigh may disperse from that flower;
  Both the dew and the oath that are there;
And I'd make a new vow every hour,
  To lose them so sweetly in air.

But clear up the heaven of your brow,
  Nor fancy my faith is a feather;
On my heart I will pledge you my vow,
  And they both must be broken together!






TO .......


Remember him thou leavest behind,
  Whose heart is warmly bound to thee,
Close as the tenderest links can bind
  A heart as warm as heart can be.

Oh! I had long in freedom roved,
  Though many seemed my soul to snare;
'Twas passion when I thought I loved,
  'Twas fancy when I thought them fair.

Even she, my muse's early theme,
  Beguiled me only while she warmed;
Twas young desire that fed the dream,
  And reason broke what passion formed.

But thou-ah! better had it been
  If I had still in freedom roved,
If I had ne'er thy beauties seen,
  For then I never should have loved.

Then all the pain which lovers feel
  Had never to this heart been known;
But then, the joys that lovers steal,
  Should _they_ have ever been my own?

Oh! trust me, when I swear thee this,
  Dearest! the pain of loving thee,
The very pain is sweeter bliss
  Than passion's wildest ecstasy.

That little cage I would not part,
  In which my soul is prisoned now,
For the most light and winged heart
  That wantons on the passing vow.

Still, my beloved! still keep in mind,
  However far removed from me,
That there is one thou leavest behind,
  Whose heart respires for only thee!

And though ungenial ties have bound
  Thy fate unto another's care,
That arm, which clasps thy bosom round,
  Cannot confine the heart that's there.

No, no! that heart is only mine
  By ties all other ties above,
For I have wed it at a shrine
  Where we have had no priest but Love.






SONG.


When Time who steals our years away
  Shall steal our pleasures too,
The memory of the past will stay
  And half our joys renew,
Then, Julia, when thy beauty's flower
  Shall feel the wintry air,
Remembrance will recall the hour
  When thou alone wert fair.
Then talk no more of future gloom;
  Our joys shall always last;
For Hope shall brighten days to come,
  And Memory gild the past.

Come, Chloe, fill the genial bowl,
  I drink to Love and thee:
Thou never canst decay in soul,
  Thou'lt still be young for me.
And as thy; lips the tear-drop chase,
  Which on my cheek they find,
So hope shall steal away the trace
  That sorrow leaves behind.
Then fill the bowl--away with gloom!
  Our joys shall always last;
For Hope shall brighten days to come,
  And Memory gild the past.

But mark, at thought of future years
  When love shall lose its soul,
My Chloe drops her timid tears,
  They mingle with my bowl.
How like this bowl of wine, my fair,
  Our loving life shall fleet;
Though tears may sometimes mingle there,
  The draught will still be sweet.
Then fill the cup--away with gloom!
  Our joys shall always last;
For Hope will brighten days to come,
  And Memory gild the past.






SONG.


Have you not seen the timid tear,
  Steal trembling from mine eye?
Have you not marked the flush of fear,
  Or caught the murmured sigh?
And can you think my love is chill,
  Nor fixt on you alone?
And can you rend, by doubting still,
  A heart so much your own?

To you my soul's affections move,
  Devoutly, warmly true;
My life has been a task of love,
  One long, long thought of you.
If all your tender faith be o'er,
  If still my truth you'll try;
Alas, _I_ know but _one_ proof more--
  I'll bless your name, and die!






REUBEN AND ROSE.

A TALE OF ROMANCE.


The darkness that hung upon Willumberg's walls
  Had long been remembered with awe and dismay;
For years not a sunbeam had played in its halls,
  And it seemed as shut out from the regions of day.

Though the valleys were brightened by many a beam,
  Yet none could the woods of that castle illume;
And the lightning which flashed on the neighboring stream
  Flew back, as if fearing to enter the gloom!

"Oh! when shall this horrible darkness disperse!"
  Said Willumberg's lord to the Seer of the Cave;--
"It can never dispel," said the wizard of verse,
  "Till the bright star of chivalry sinks in the wave!"

And who was the bright star of chivalry then?
  Who _could_ be but Reuben, the flower of the age?
For Reuben was first in the combat of men,
  Though Youth had scarce written his name on her page.

For Willumberg's daughter his young heart had beat,
  For Rose, who was bright as the spirit of dawn,
When with wand dropping diamonds, and silvery feet,
  It walks o'er the flowers of the mountain and lawn.

Must Rose, then, from Reuben so fatally sever?
  Sad, sad were the words of the Seer of the Cave,
That darkness should cover that castle forever,
  Or Reuben be sunk in the merciless wave!

To the wizard she flew, saying, "Tell me, oh, tell?
  Shall my Reuben no more be restored to my eyes?"
"Yes, yes--when a spirit shall toll the great bell
  Of the mouldering abbey, your Reuben shall rise!"

Twice, thrice he repeated "Your Reuben shall rise!"
  And Rose felt a moment's release from her pain;
And wiped, while she listened, the tears from her eyes.
  And hoped she might yet see her hero again.

That hero could smite at the terrors of death,
  When he felt that he died for the sire of his Rose;
To the Oder he flew, and there, plunging beneath,
  In the depth of the billows soon found his repose.--

How strangely the order of destiny falls!
  Not long in the waters the warrior lay,
When a sunbeam was seen to glance over the walls,
  And the castle of Willumberg basked in the ray!

All, all but the soul of the maid was in light,
  There sorrow and terror lay gloomy and blank:
Two days did she wander, and all the long night,
  In quest of her love, on the wide river's bank.

Oft, oft did she pause for the toll of the bell,
  And heard but the breathings of night in the air;
Long, long did she gaze on the watery swell,
  And saw but the foam of the white billow there.

And often as midnight its veil would undraw,
  As she looked at the light of the moon in the stream,
She thought 'twas his helmet of silver she saw,
  As the curl of the surge glittered high in the beam.

And now the third night was begemming the sky;
  Poor Rose, on the cold dewy margent reclined,
There wept till the tear almost froze in her eye,
  When--hark!--'twas the bell that came deep in the wind!

She startled, and saw, through the glimmering shade,
  A form o'er the waters in majesty glide;
She knew 'twas her love, though his cheek was decayed,
And his helmet of silver was washed by the tide.

Was this what the Seer of the Cave had foretold?--
  Dim, dim through the phantom the moon shot a gleam;
'Twas Reuben, but, ah! he was deathly and cold,
  And fleeted away like the spell of a dream!

Twice, thrice did he rise, and as often she thought
  From the bank to embrace him, but vain her endeavor!
Then, plunging beneath, at a billow she caught,
  And sunk to repose on its bosom forever!






DID NOT.


'Twas a new feeling--something more
Than we had dared to own before.
  Which then we hid not;
We saw it in each other's eye,
And wished, in every half-breathed sigh,
  To speak, but did not.

She felt my lips' impassioned touch--
'Twas the first time I dared so much,
  And yet she chid not;
But whispered o'er my burning brow,
"Oh! do you doubt I love you now?"
  Sweet soul! I did not.

Warmly I felt her bosom thrill,
I prest it closer, closer still,
  Though gently bid not;
Till--oh! the world hath seldom heard
Of lovers, who so nearly erred,
  And yet, who did not.






TO .......


That wrinkle, when first I espied it,
  At once put my heart out of pain;
Till the eye, that was glowing beside it,
  Disturbed my ideas again.

Thou art just in the twilight at present,
  When woman's declension begins;
When, fading from all that is pleasant,
  She bids a good night to her sins.

Yet thou still art so lovely to me,
  I would sooner, my exquisite mother!
Repose in the sunset of thee,
  Than bask in the noon of another.






TO MRS. .......

ON SOME CALUMNIES AGAINST HER CHARACTER.


Is not thy mind a gentle mind?
Is not that heart a heart refined?
Hast thou not every gentle grace,
We love in woman's mind and face?
And, oh! art _thou_ a shrine for Sin
To hold her hateful worship in?

No, no, be happy--dry that tear--
Though some thy heart hath harbored near,
May now repay its love with blame;
Though man, who ought to shield thy fame,
Ungenerous man, be first to shun thee;
Though all the world look cold upon thee,
Yet shall thy pureness keep thee still
Unharmed by that surrounding chill;
Like the famed drop, in crystal found,[1]
Floating, while all was frozen round,--
Unchilled unchanging shalt thou be,
Safe in thy own sweet purity.


[1] This alludes to a curious gem, upon which Claudian has left
us some very elaborate epigrams. It was a drop of pure water enclosed
within a piece of crystal. Addison mentions a curiosity of this kind at
Milan; and adds; "It is such a rarity as this that I saw at Vendme in
France, which they there pretend is a tear that our Saviour shed over
Lazarus, and was gathered up by an angel, who put it into a little crystal
vial, and made a present of it to Mary Magdalen".






ANACREONTIC.


    --_in lachrymas verterat omne merum_.
    TIB. lib. i. eleg. 5.


Press the grape, and let it pour
Around the board its purple shower:
And, while the drops my goblet steep,
I'll think in woe the clusters weep.

Weep on, weep on, my pouting vine!
Heaven grant no tears, but tears of wine.
Weep on; and, as thy sorrows flow,
I'll taste the luxury of woe.






TO .......


When I loved you, I can't but allow
  I had many an exquisite minute;
But the scorn that I feel for you now
  Hath even more luxury in it.

Thus, whether we're on or we're off,
  Some witchery seems to await you;
To love you was pleasant enough,
  And, oh! 'tis delicious hate you!






TO JULIA.

IN ALLUSION TO SOME ILLIBERAL CRITICISMS.


Why, let the stingless critic chide
With all that fume of vacant pride
Which mantles o'er the pendant fool,
Like vapor on a stagnant pool.
Oh! if the song, to feeling true,
Can please the elect, the sacred few,
Whose souls, by Taste and Nature taught,
Thrill with the genuine pulse of thought--
If some fond feeling maid like thee,
The warm-eyed child of Sympathy,
Shall say, while o'er my simple theme
She languishes in Passion's dream,
"He was, indeed, a tender soul--
 No critic law, no chill control,
 Should ever freeze, by timid art,
 The flowings of so fond a heart!"
Yes, soul of Nature! soul of Love!
That, hovering like a snow-winged dove,
Breathed o'er my cradle warblings wild,
And hailed me Passion's warmest child,--
Grant me the tear from Beauty's eye,
From Feeling's breast the votive sigh;
Oh! let my song, my memory find,
A shrine within the tender mind!
And I will smile when critics chide,
And I will scorn the fume of pride
Which mantles o'er the pendant fool,
Like vapor round some stagnant pool!






TO JULIA.


Mock me no more with Love's beguiling dream,
  A dream, I find, illusory as sweet:
One smile of friendship, nay, of cold esteem,
  Far dearer were than passion's bland deceit!

I've heard you oft eternal truth declare;
  Your heart was only mine, I once believed.
Ah! shall I say that all your vows were air?
  And _must_ I say, my hopes were all deceived?

Vow, then, no longer that our souls are twined
  That all our joys are felt with mutual zeal;
Julia!--'tis pity, pity makes you kind;
  You know I love, and you would _seem_ to feel.

But shall I still go seek within those arms
  A joy in which affection takes no part?
No, no, farewell! you give me but your charms,
  When I had fondly thought you gave your heart.






THE SHRINE.

TO .......


My fates had destined me to rove
A long, long pilgrimage of love;
And many an altar on my way
Has lured my pious steps to stay;
For if the saint was young and fair,
I turned, and sung my vespers there.
This, from a youthful pilgrim's fire,
Is what your pretty saints require:
To pass, nor tell a single bead,
With them would be profane indeed!
But, trust me, all this young devotion
Was but to keep my zeal in motion;
And, every humbler altar past,
I now have reached THE SHRINE at last!






TO A LADY,

WITH SOME MANUSCRIPT POEMS,

ON LEAVING THE COUNTRY.


When, casting many a look behind,
  I leave the friends I cherish here--
Perchance some other friends to find,
  But surely finding none so dear--

Haply the little simple page,
  Which votive thus I've traced for thee,
May now and then a look engage,
  And steal one moment's thought for me.

But, oh! in pity let not those
  Whose hearts are not of gentle mould,
Let not the eye that seldom flows
  With feeling's tear, my song behold.

For, trust me, they who never melt
  With pity, never melt with love;
And such will frown at all I've felt,
  And all my loving lays reprove.

But if, perhaps, some gentler mind,
  Which rather loves to praise than blame,
Should in my page an interest find.
  And linger kindly on my name;

Tell him--or, oh! if, gentler still,
  By female lips my name be blest:
For where do all affections thrill
  So sweetly as in woman's breast?--

Tell her, that he whose loving themes
  Her eye indulgent wanders o'er,
Could sometimes wake from idle dreams,
  And bolder flights of fancy soar;

That Glory oft would claim the lay,
  And Friendship oft his numbers move;
But whisper then, that, "sooth to say,
  His sweetest song was given to Love!"






TO JULIA.


Though Fate, my girl, may bid us part,
  Our souls it cannot, shall not sever;
The heart will seek its kindred heart,
  And cling to it as close as ever.

But must we, must we part indeed?
  Is all our dream of rapture over?
And does not Julia's bosom bleed
  To leave so dear, so fond a lover?

Does _she_, too, mourn?--Perhaps she may;
  Perhaps she mourns our bliss so fleeting;
But why is Julia's eye so gay,
  If Julia's heart like mine is beating?

I oft have loved that sunny glow
  Of gladness in her blue eye beaming--
But can the bosom bleed with woe
  While joy is in the glances beaming?

No, no!--Yet, love, I will not chide;
  Although your heart _were_ fond of roving,
Nor that, nor all the world beside
  Could keep your faithful boy from loving.

You'll soon be distant from his eye,
  And, with you, all that's worth possessing.
Oh! then it will be sweet to die,
  When life has lost its only blessing!






TO .......


Sweet lady, look not thus again:
  Those bright, deluding smiles recall
A maid remember'd now with pain,
  Who was my love, my life, my all!

Oh! while this heart bewildered took
  Sweet poison from her thrilling eye,
Thus would she smile and lisp and look,
  And I would hear and gaze and sigh!

Yes, I did love her--wildly love--
  She was her sex's best deceiver!
And oft she swore she'd never rove--
  And I was destined to believe her!

Then, lady, do not wear the smile
  Of one whose smile could thus betray;
Alas! I think the lovely wile
  Again could steal my heart away.

For, when those spells that charmed my mind
  On lips so pure as thine I see,
I fear the heart which she resigned
  Will err again and fly to thee!






NATURE'S LABELS.

A FRAGMENT.


In vain we fondly strive to trace
The soul's reflection in the face;
In vain we dwell on lines and crosses,
Crooked mouth or short proboscis;
Boobies have looked as wise and bright
As Plato or the Stagirite:
And many a sage and learned skull
Has peeped through windows dark and dull.
Since then, though art do all it can,
We ne'er can reach the inward man,
Nor (howsoe'er "learned Thebans" doubt)
The inward woman, from without,
Methinks 'twere well if nature could
(And Nature could, if Nature would)
Some pithy, short descriptions write
On tablets large, in black and white,
Which she might hang about our throttles,
Like labels upon physic-bottles;
And where all men might read--but stay--
As dialectic sages say,
The argument most apt and ample
For common use is the example.
For instance, then, if Nature's care
Had not portrayed, in lines so fair,
The inward soul of Lucy Lindon.
_This_ is the label she'd have pinned on.

LABEL FIRST.

Within this form there lies enshrined
The purest, brightest gem of mind.
Though Feeling's hand may sometimes throw
Upon its charms the shade of woe,
The lustre of the gem, when veiled,
Shall be but mellowed, not concealed.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now, sirs, imagine, if you're able,
That Nature wrote a second label,
They're her own words--at least suppose so--
And boldly pin it on Pomposo.

LABEL SECOND.

When I composed the fustian brain
Of this redoubted Captain Vain.
I had at hand but few ingredients,
And so was forced to use expedients.
I put therein some small discerning,
A grain of sense, a grain of learning;
And when I saw the void behind,
I filled it up with--froth and wind!

       *       *       *       *       *






TO JULIA

ON HER BIRTHDAY.


When Time was entwining the garland of years,
  Which to crown my beloved was given,
Though some of the leaves might be sullied with tears,
  Yet the flowers were all gathered in heaven.

And long may this garland be sweet to the eye,
  May its verdure forever be new;
Young Love shall enrich it with many a sigh,
  And Sympathy nurse it with dew.






A REFLECTION AT SEA.


See how, beneath the moonbeam's smile,
  Yon little billow heaves its breast,
And foams and sparkles for awhile,--
  Then murmuring subsides to rest.

Thus man, the sport of bliss and care,
  Rises on time's eventful sea:
And, having swelled a moment there,
  Thus melts into eternity!






CLORIS AND FANNY.


Cloris! if I were Persia's king,
  I'd make my graceful queen of thee;
While FANNY, wild and artless thing,
  Should but thy humble handmaid be.

There is but _one_ objection in it--
  That, verily, I'm much afraid
I should, in some unlucky minute,
  Forsake the mistress for the maid.






THE SHIELD.


Say, did you not hear a voice of death!
  And did you not mark the paly form
Which rode on the silvery mist of the heath,
  And sung a ghostly dirge in the storm?

Was it the wailing bird of the gloom,
  That shrieks on the house of woe all night?
Or a shivering fiend that flew to a tomb,
  To howl and to feed till the glance of light?

'Twas _not_ the death-bird's cry from the wood,
  Nor shivering fiend that hung on the blast;
'Twas the shade of Helderic--man of blood--
  It screams for the guilt of days that are past.

See, how the red, red lightning strays,
  And scares the gliding ghosts of the heath!
Now on the leafless yew it plays,
  Where hangs the shield of this son of death.

That shield is blushing with murderous stains;
  Long has it hung from the cold yew's spray;
It is blown by storms and washed by rains,
  But neither can take the blood away!

Oft by that yew, on the blasted field,
  Demons dance to the red moon's light;
While the damp boughs creak, and the swinging shield
  Sings to the raving spirit of night!






TO JULIA WEEPING.


Oh! if your tears are given to care,
   If real woe disturbs your peace,
Come to my bosom, weeping fair!
  And I will bid your weeping cease.

But if with Fancy's visioned fears,
  With dreams of woe your bosom thrill;
You look so lovely in your tears,
  That I must bid you drop them still.






DREAMS.

TO ... ....


In slumber, I prithee how is it
  That souls are oft taking the air,
And paying each other a visit,
  While bodies are heaven knows where?

Last night, 'tis in vain to deny it,
  Your soul took a fancy to roam,
For I heard her, on tiptoe so quiet,
  Come ask, whether _mine_ was at home.

And mine let her in with delight,
  And they talked and they laughed the time through;
For, when souls come together at night,
  There is no saying what they mayn't do!

And _your_ little Soul, heaven bless her!
  Had much to complain and to say,
Of how sadly you wrong and oppress her
  By keeping her prisoned all day.

"If I happen," said she, "but to steal
  "For a peep now and then to her eye,
"Or, to quiet the fever I feel,
  "Just venture abroad on a sigh;

"In an instant she frightens me in
  "With some phantom of prudence or terror,
"For fear I should stray into sin,
  "Or, what is still worse, into error!

"So, instead of displaying my graces,
  "By daylight, in language and mien,
"I am shut up in corners and places,
  "Where truly I blush to be seen!"

Upon hearing this piteous confession,
  _My_ Soul, looking tenderly at her,
Declared, as for grace and discretion,
  He did not know much of the matter;

"But, to-morrow, sweet Spirit!" he said,
  "Be at home, after midnight, and then
"I will come when your lady's in bed,
  "And we'll talk o'er the subject again."

So she whispered a word in his ear,
  I suppose to her door to direct him,
And, just after midnight, my dear,
  Your polite little Soul may expect him.






TO ROSA.

WRITTEN DURING ILLNESS.


The wisest soul, by anguish torn,
  Will soon unlearn the lore it knew;
And when the shrining casket's worn,
  The gem within will tarnish too.

But love's an essence of the soul,
  Which sinks hot with this chain of clay;
Which throbs beyond the chill control
  Of withering pain or pale decay.

And surely, when the touch of Death
  Dissolves the spirit's earthly ties,
Love still attends the immortal breath,
  And makes it purer for the skies!

Oh Rosa, when, to seek its sphere,
  My soul shall leave this orb of men,
That love which formed its treasure here,
  Shall be its _best_ of treasures then!

And as, in fabled dreams of old,
  Some air-born genius, child of time,
Presided o'er each star that rolled,
  And tracked it through its path sublime;

So thou, fair planet, not unled,
  Shalt through thy mortal orbit stray;
Thy lover's shade, to thee still wed,
  Shall linger round thy earthly way.

Let other spirits range the sky,
  And play around each starry gem;
I'll bask beneath that lucid eye,
  Nor envy worlds of suns to them.

And when that heart shall cease to beat,
  And when that breath at length is free,
Then, Rosa, soul to soul we'll meet,
  And mingle to eternity!






SONG.


The wreath you wove, the wreath you wove,
  Is fair--but oh, how fair,
If Pity's hand had stolen from Love
One leaf, to mingle there!

If every rose with gold were tied,
  Did gems for dewdrops fall,
One faded leaf where Love had sighed
  Were sweetly worth them all.

The wreath you wove,--the wreath you wove
  Our emblem well may be;
Its bloom is yours, but hopeless Love
  Must keep its tears for me.






THE SALE OF LOVES.


I dreamt that, in the Paphian groves,
  My nets by moonlight laying,
I caught a flight of wanton Loves,
  Among the rose-beds playing.
Some just had left their silvery shell,
  While some were full in feather;
So pretty a lot of Loves to sell,
  Were never yet strung together.
    Come buy my Loves,
    Come buy my Loves,
Ye dames and rose-lipped misses!--
  They're new and bright,
  The cost is light,
For the coin of this isle is kisses.

First Cloris came, with looks sedate.
  The coin on her lips was ready;
"I buy," quoth she, "my Love by weight,
  "Full grown, if you please, and steady."
"Let mine be light," said Fanny, "pray--
  "Such lasting toys undo one;
"A light little Love that will last to-day,--
  "To-morrow I'll sport a new one."
     Come buy my Loves,
     Come buy my Loves,
Ye dames and rose-lipped misses!--
  There's some will keep,
  Some light and cheap
At from ten to twenty kisses.

The learned Prue took a pert young thing,
  To divert her virgin Muse with,
And pluck sometimes a quill from his wing.
  To indite her billet-doux with,
Poor Cloe would give for a well-fledged pair
  Her only eye, if you'd ask it;
And Tabitha begged, old toothless fair.
  For the youngest Love in the basket.
    Come buy my Loves, etc.

But _one_ was left, when Susan came,
  One worth them all together;
At sight of her dear looks of shame,
  He smiled and pruned his feather.
She wished the boy--'twas more than whim--
  Her looks, her sighs betrayed it;
But kisses were not enough for him,
  I asked a heart and she paid it!
    Good-by, my Loves,
    Good-by, my Loves,
'Twould make you smile to've seen us
  First, trade for this
  Sweet child of bliss,
And then nurse the boy between us.






TO .... ....


The world has just begun to steal
  Each hope that led me lightly on;
I felt not, as I used to feel,
  And life grew dark and love was gone.

No eye to mingle sorrow's tear,
  No lip to mingle pleasure's breath,
No circling arms to draw me near--
  'Twas gloomy, and I wished for death.

But when I saw that gentle eye,
  Oh! something seemed to tell me then,
That I was yet too young to die,
  And hope and bliss might bloom again.

With every gentle smile that crost
  Your kindling cheek, you lighted home
Some feeling which my heart had lost
  And peace which far had learned to roam.

'Twas then indeed so sweet to live,
   Hope looked so new and Love so kind.
That, though I mourn, I yet forgive
   The ruin they have left behind.

I could have loved you--oh, so well!--
  The dream, that wishing boyhood knows,
Is but a bright, beguiling spell,
  That only lives while passion glows.

But, when this early flush declines,
  When the heart's sunny morning fleets,
You know not then how close it twines
  Round the first kindred soul it meets.

Yes, yes, I could have loved, as one
  Who, while his youth's enchantments fall,
Finds something dear to rest upon,
  Which pays him for the loss of all.






TO ....  ....


Never mind how the pedagogue proses,
  You want not antiquity's stamp;
A lip, that such fragrance discloses,
  Oh! never should smell of the lamp.

Old Cloe, whose withering kiss
  Hath long set the Loves at defiance,
Now, done with the science of bliss,
  May take to the blisses of science.

But for _you_ to be buried in books--
  Ah, Fanny, they're pitiful sages,
Who could not in _one_ of your looks
  Read more than in millions of pages.

Astronomy finds in those eyes
  Better light than she studies above;
And Music would borrow your sighs
  As the melody fittest for Love.

Your Arithmetic only can trip
  If to count your own charms you endeavor;
And Eloquence glows on your lip
  When you swear that you'll love me for ever.

Thus you see, what a brilliant alliance
  Of arts is assembled in you;--
A course of more exquisite science
  Man never need wish to pursue.

And, oh!--if a Fellow like me
  May confer a diploma of hearts,
With my lip thus I seal your degree,
  My divine little Mistress of Arts!






ON THE DEATH OF A LADY,


Sweet spirit! if thy airy sleep
  Nor sees my tears not hears my sighs,
Then will I weep, in anguish weep,
  Till the last heart's drop fills mine eyes.

But if thy sainted soul can feel,
  And mingles in our misery;
Then, then my breaking heart I'll seal--
  Thou shalt not hear one sigh from me.

The beam of morn was on the stream,
  But sullen clouds the day deform;
Like thee was that young, orient beam,
  Like death, alas, that sullen storm!

Thou wert not formed for living here,
  So linked thy soul was with the sky;
Yet, ah, we held thee all so dear,
  We thought thou wert not formed to die.






INCONSTANCY.


And do I then wonder that Julia deceives me,
  When surely there's nothing in nature more common?
She vows to be true, and while vowing she leaves me--
  And could I expect any more from a woman?

Oh, woman! your heart is a pitiful treasure;
  And Mahomet's doctrine was not too severe,
When he held that you were but materials of pleasure,
  And reason and thinking were out of your sphere.

By your heart, when the fond sighing lover can win it,
  He thinks that an age of anxiety's paid;
But, oh, while he's blest, let him die at the minute--
  If he live but a _day_, he'll be surely betrayed.






THE NATAL GENIUS.

A DREAM

TO .... ....

THE MORNING OF HER BIRTHDAY.


In witching slumbers of the night,
I dreamt I was the airy sprite
  That on thy natal moment smiled;
And thought I wafted on my wing
Those flowers which in Elysium spring,
  To crown my lovely mortal child.

With olive-branch I bound thy head,
Heart's ease along thy path I shed,
  Which was to bloom through all thy years;
Nor yet did I forget to bind
Love's roses, with his myrtle twined,
  And dewed by sympathetic tears.

Such was the wild but precious boon
Which Fancy, at her magic noon,
  Bade me to Nona's image pay;
And were it thus my fate to be
Thy little guardian deity,
  How blest around thy steps I'd play!

Thy life should glide in peace along,
Calm as some lonely shepherd's song
  That's heard at distance in the grove;
No cloud should ever dim thy sky,
No thorns along thy pathway lie,
  But all be beauty, peace and love.

Indulgent Time should never bring
To thee one blight upon his wing,
  So gently o'er thy brow he'd fly;
And death itself should but be felt
Like that of daybeams, when they melt,
  Bright to the last, in evening's sky!






ELEGIAC STANZAS.

SUPPOSED TO BE WRITTEN BY JULIA,

ON THE DEATH OF HER BROTHER.


Though sorrow long has worn my heart;
  Though every day I've, counted o'er
Hath brought a new and, quickening smart
  To wounds that rankled fresh before;

Though in my earliest life bereft
  Of tender links by nature tied;
Though hope deceived, and pleasure left;
  Though friends betrayed and foes belied;

I still had hopes--for hope will stay
  After the sunset of delight;
So like the star which ushers day,
  We scarce can think it heralds night!--

I hoped that, after all its strife,
  My weary heart at length should rest.
And, feinting from the waves of life,
  Find harbor in a brother's breast.

That brother's breast was warm with truth,
  Was bright with honor's purest ray;
He was the dearest, gentlest youth--
  Ah, why then was he torn away?

He should have stayed, have lingered here
  To soothe his Julia's every woe;
He should have chased each bitter tear,
  And not have caused those tears to flow.

We saw within his soul expand
  The fruits of genius, nurst by taste;
While Science, with a fostering hand,
  Upon his brow her chaplet placed.

We saw, by bright degrees, his mind
  Grow rich in all that makes men dear;
Enlightened, social, and refined,
  In friendship firm, in love sincere.

Such was the youth we loved so well,
  And such the hopes that fate denied;--
We loved, but ah! could scarcely tell
  How deep, how dearly, till he died!

Close as the fondest links could strain,
  Twined with my very heart he grew;
And by that fate which breaks the chain,
  The heart is almost broken too.






TO THE LARGE AND BEAUTIFUL MISS......,

IN ALLUSION TO SOME PARTNERSHIP IN A LOTTERY SHARE

IMPROMPTU.


    --_Ego Pars_--VIRG.


In wedlock a species of lottery lies,
  Where in blanks and in prizes we deal;
But how comes it that you, such a capital prize,
  Should so long have remained in the wheel?

If ever, by Fortune's indulgent decree,
  To me such a ticket should roll,
A sixteenth, Heaven knows! were sufficient for me;
  For what could _I_ do with the whole?






A DREAM.


I thought this heart enkindled lay
  On Cupid's burning shrine:
I thought he stole thy heart away,
  And placed it near to mine.

I saw thy heart begin to melt,
  Like ice before the sun;
Till both a glow congenial felt,
  And mingled into one!






TO  .......


With all my soul, then, let us part,
  Since both are anxious to be free;
And I will sand you home your heart,
  If you will send mine back to me.

We've had some happy hours together,
  But joy must often change its wing;
And spring would be but gloomy weather,
  If we had nothing else but spring.

'Tis not that I expect to find
  A more devoted, fond and true one,
With rosier cheek or sweeter mind--
  Enough for me that she's a new one.

Thus let us leave the bower of love,
  Where we have loitered long in bliss;
And you may down _that_ pathway rove,
  While I shall take my way through _this_.






ANACREONTIC.


"She never looked so kind before--
  "Yet why the wanton's smile recall?
"I've seen this witchery o'er and o'er,
  "'Tis hollow, vain, and heartless all!"

Thus I said and, sighing drained
  The cup which she so late had tasted;
Upon whose rim still fresh remained
  The breath, so oft in falsehood wasted.

I took the harp and would have sung
  As if 'twere not of her I sang;
But still the notes on Lamia hung--
  On whom but Lamia _could_ they hang?

Those eyes of hers, that floating shine,
  Like diamonds in some eastern river;
That kiss, for which, if worlds were mine,
  A world for every kiss I'd give her.

That frame so delicate, yet warmed
  With flushes of love's genial hue;
A mould transparent, as if formed
  To let the spirit's light shine through.

Of these I sung, and notes and words
  Were sweet, as if the very air
From Lamia's lip hung o'er the chords,
  And Lamia's voice still warbled there!

But when, alas, I turned the theme,
  And when of vows and oaths I spoke,
Of truth and hope's seducing dream--
  The chord beneath my finger broke.

False harp! false woman! such, oh, such
  Are lutes too frail and hearts too willing;
Any hand, whate'er its touch,
  Can set their chords or pulses thrilling.

And when that thrill is most awake,
  And when you think Heaven's joys await you,
The nymph will change, the chord will break--
  Oh Love, oh Music, how I hate you!






TO JULIA.


I saw the peasant's hand unkind
  From yonder oak the ivy sever;
They seemed in very being twined;
  Yet now the oak is fresh as ever!

Not so the widowed ivy shines:
  Torn from its dear and only stay,
In drooping widowhood it pines,
  And scatters all its bloom away.

Thus, Julia, did our hearts entwine,
  Till Fate disturbed their tender ties:
Thus gay indifference blooms in thine,
  While mine, deserted, droops and dies!






HYMN OF A VIRGIN OF DELPHI,

AT THE TOMB OF HER MOTHER.


Oh, lost, forever lost--no more
  Shall Vesper light our dewy way
Along the rocks of Crissa's shore,
  To hymn the fading fires of day;
No more to Tempe's distant vale
  In holy musings shall we roam,
Through summer's glow and winter's gale,
  To bear the mystic chaplets home.[1]

'Twas then my soul's expanding zeal,
  By nature warmed and led by thee,
In every breeze was taught to feel
  The breathings of a Deity.
Guide of my heart! still hovering round.
  Thy looks, thy words are still my own--
I see thee raising from the ground
  Some laurel, by the winds o'er thrown.
And hear thee say, "This humble bough
  Was planted for a doom divine;
And, though it droop in languor now,
  Shall flourish on the Delphic shrine!"
"Thus, in the vale of earthly sense,
 "Though sunk awhile the spirit lies,
"A viewless hand shall cull it thence
 "To bloom immortal in the skies!"

All that the young should feel and know
 By thee was taught so sweetly well,
Thy words fell soft as vernal snow,
 And all was brightness where they fell!
Fond soother of my infant tear,
 Fond sharer of my infant joy,
Is not thy shade still lingering here?
 Am I not still thy soul's employ?
Oh yes--and, as in former days,
 When, meeting on the sacred mount,
Our nymphs awaked their choral lays,
 And danced around Cassotis' fount;
As then, 'twas all thy wish and care,
 That mine should be the simplest mien,
My lyre and voice the sweetest there,
 My foot the lightest o'er the green:
So still, each look and step to mould,
 Thy guardian care is round me spread,
Arranging every snowy fold
 And guiding every mazy tread.
And, when I lead the hymning choir,
 Thy spirit still, unseen and free,
Hovers between my lip and lyre,
 And weds them into harmony.
Flow, Plistus, flow, thy murmuring wave
 Shall never drop its silvery tear
Upon so pure, so blest a grave,
 To memory so entirely dear!


[1] The laurel, for the common uses of the temple, for adorning
the altars and sweeping the pavement, was supplied by a tree near the
fountain of Castalia; but upon all important occasions, they sent to Tempe
for their laurel. We find, in Pausanias; that this valley supplied the
branches, of which the temple was originally constructed; and Plutarch
says, in his Dialogue on Music, "The youth who brings the Tempic laurel to
Delphi is always attended by a player on the flute."






SYMPATHY.

TO JULIA.


    --_sine me sit nulla Venus_.
    SULPICIA.


Our hearts, my love, were formed to be
The genuine twins of Sympathy,
  They live with one sensation;
In joy or grief, but most in love,
Like chords in unison they move,
  And thrill with like vibration.

How oft I've beard thee fondly say,
Thy vital pulse shall cease to play
  When mine no more is moving;
Since, now, to feel a joy _alone_
Were worse to thee than feeling none,
  So twined are we in loving!






THE TEAR.


On beds of snow the moonbeam slept,
  And chilly was the midnight gloom,
When by the damp grave Ellen wept--
  Fond maid! it was her Lindor's tomb!

A warm tear gushed, the wintry air,
  Congealed it as it flowed away:
All night it lay an ice-drop there,
  At morn it glittered in the ray.

An angel, wandering from her sphere,
  Who saw this bright, this frozen gem,
To dew-eyed Pity brought the tear
  And hung it on her diadem!






THE SNAKE.


My love and I, the other day,
Within a myrtle arbor lay,
When near us, from a rosy bed,
A little Snake put forth its head.

"See," said the maid with thoughtful eyes--
"Yonder the fatal emblem lies!
"Who could expect such hidden harm
"Beneath the rose's smiling charm?"

Never did grave remark occur
Less _-propos_ than this from her.

I rose to kill the snake, but she,
Half-smiling, prayed it might not be.

"No," said the maiden--and, alas,
  Her eyes spoke volumes, while she said it--
"Long as the snake is in the grass,
  "One _may_, perhaps, have cause to dread it:
"But, when its wicked eyes appear,
  "And when we know for what they wink so,
"One must be _very_ simple, dear,
  "To let it wound one--don't you think so?"






TO ROSA.


Is the song of Rosa mute?
Once such lays inspired her lute!
Never doth a sweeter song
Steal the breezy lyre along,
When the wind, in odors dying,
Woos it with enamor'd sighing.

  Is my Rosa's lute unstrung?
Once a tale of peace it sung
To her lover's throbbing breast--
Then was he divinely blest!
Ah! but Rosa loves no more,
Therefore Rosa's song is o'er;
And her lute neglected lies;
And her boy forgotten sighs.
Silent lute--forgotten lover--
Rosa's love and song are over!






ELEGIAC STANZAS.


    _Sic juvat perire_.


When wearied wretches sink to sleep,
 How heavenly soft their slumbers lie!
How sweet is death to those who weep,
To those who weep and long to die!

Saw you the soft and grassy bed,
  Where flowrets deck the green earth's breast?
'Tis there I wish to lay my head,
  'Tis there I wish to sleep at rest.

Oh, let not tears embalm my tomb,--
 None but the dews at twilight given!
Oh, let not sighs disturb the gloom,--
 None but the whispering winds of heaven!






LOVE AND MARRIAGE.


    _Eque brevi verbo ferre perenne malum_.
    SECUNDUS, eleg. vii.


Still the question I must parry,
  Still a wayward truant prove:
Where I love, I must not marry;
  Where I marry, can not love.

Were she fairest of creation,
  With the least presuming mind;
Learned without affectation;
  Not deceitful, yet refined;

Wise enough, but never rigid;
  Gay, but not too lightly free;
Chaste as snow, and yet not frigid:
  Fond, yet satisfied with me:

Were she all this ten times over,
  All that heaven to earth allows.
I should be too much her lover
  Ever to become her spouse.

Love will never bear enslaving;
  Summer garments suit him best;
Bliss itself is not worth having,
  If we're by compulsion blest.






ANACREONTIC.


I filled to thee, to thee I drank,
  I nothing did but drink and fill;
The bowl by turns was bright and blank,
  'Twas drinking, filling, drinking still.

At length I bade an artist paint
  Thy image in this ample cup,
That I might see the dimpled saint,
  To whom I quaffed my nectar up.

Behold, how bright that purple lip
  Now blushes through the wave at me;
Every roseate drop I sip
  Is just like kissing wine from thee.

And still I drink the more for this;
  For, ever when the draught I drain,
Thy lip invites another kiss,
  And--in the nectar flows again.

So, here's to thee, my gentle dear,
  And may that eyelid never shine
Beneath a darker, bitterer tear
  Than bathes it in this bowl of mine!






THE SURPRISE.


Chloris, I swear, by all I ever swore,
That from this hour I shall not love thee more.--
"What! love no more? Oh! why this altered vow?"
Because I _can not_ love thee _more_
  --than _now_!






TO MISS .......

ON HER ASKING THE AUTHOR WHY SHE HAD SLEEPLESS NIGHTS.


I'll ask the sylph who round thee flies,
  And in thy breath his pinion dips,
Who suns him in thy radiant eyes,
  And faints upon thy sighing lips:

I'll ask him where's the veil of sleep
  That used to shade thy looks of light;
And why those eyes their vigil keep
  When other suns are sunk in night?

And I will say--her angel breast
  Has never throbbed with guilty sting;
Her bosom is the sweetest nest
  Where Slumber could repose his wing!

And I will say--her cheeks that flush,
  Like vernal roses in the sun,
Have ne'er by shame been taught to blush,
  Except for what her eyes have done!

Then tell me, why, thou child of air!
  Does slumber from her eyelids rove?
What is her heart's impassioned care?
  Perhaps, oh sylph! perhaps, 'tis _love_.






THE WONDER.


Come, tell me where the maid is found.
  Whose heart can love without deceit,
And I will range the world around,
  To sigh one moment at her feet.

Oh! tell me where's her sainted home,
  What air receives her blessed sigh,
A pilgrimage of years I'll roam
  To catch one sparkle of her eye!

And if her cheek be smooth and bright,
  While truth within her bosom lies,
I'll gaze upon her morn and night,
  Till my heart leave me through my eyes.

Show me on earth a thing so rare,
  I'll own all miracles are true;
To make one maid sincere and fair,
  Oh, 'tis the utmost Heaven can do!






LYING.


    _Che con le lor bugie pajon divini._
    MAURO D'ARCANO.


I do confess, in many a sigh,
My lips have breathed you many a lie;
And who, with such delights in view,
Would lose them for a lie or two?

  Nay,--look not thus, with brow reproving;
Lies are, my dear, the soul of loving.
If half we tell the girls were true,
If half we swear to think and do,
Were aught but lying's bright illusion,
This world would be in strange confusion.
If ladies' eyes were, every one,
As lovers swear, a radiant sun,
Astronomy must leave the skies,
To learn her lore in ladies' eyes.
Oh, no--believe me, lovely girl,
When nature turns your teeth to pearl,
Your neck to snow, your eyes to fire,
Your amber locks to golden wire,
Then, only then can Heaven decree,
That you should live for only me,
Or I for you, as night and morn,
We've swearing kist, and kissing sworn.
  And now, my gentle hints to clear,
For once I'll tell you truth, my dear.
Whenever you may chance to meet
Some loving youth, whose love is sweet,
Long as you're false and he believes you,
Long as you trust and he deceives you,
So long the blissful bond endures,
And while he lies, his heart is yours:
But, oh! you've wholly lost the youth
The instant that he tells you truth.






ANACREONTIC.


Friend of my soul, this goblet sip,
  'Twill chase that pensive tear;
'Tis not so sweet as woman's lip,
  But, oh! 'tis more sincere.

  Like her delusive beam,
    'Twill steal away thy mind:
  But, truer than love's dream,
    It leaves no sting behind.

Come, twine the wreath, thy brows to shade;
  These flowers were culled at noon;--
Like woman's love the rose will fade,
  But, ah! not half so soon.
    For though the flower's decayed,
      Its fragrance is not o'er;
    But once when love's betrayed,
      Its sweet life blooms no more.






THE PHILOSOPHER ARISTIPPUS[1]

TO A LAMP WHICH HAD BEEN GIVEN HIM BY LAIS.


    _Dulcis conscia lectuli lucerna_.
    MARTIAL, _lib. xiv. epig. 89_.


"Oh! love the Lamp" (my Mistress said),
  "The faithful Lamp that, many a night,
"Beside thy Lais' lonely bed?
  "Has kept its little watch of light.

"Full often has it seen her weep,
  "And fix her eye upon its flame.
"Till, weary, she has sunk to sleep,
  "Repeating her beloved's name.

"Then love the Lamp--'twill often lead
  "Thy step through learning's sacred way;
"And when those studious eyes shall read,
 "At midnight, by its lonely ray,
  "Of things sublime, of nature's birth,
  "Of all that's bright in heaven or earth,
 Oh, think that she, by whom 'twas given,
"Adores thee more than earth or heaven!"

Yes--dearest Lamp, by every charm
  On which thy midnight beam has hung;
The head reclined, the graceful arm
  Across the brow of ivory flung;

The heaving bosom, partly hid,
  The severed lips unconscious sighs,
The fringe that from the half-shut lid
  Adown the cheek of roses lies;

By these, by all that bloom untold,
  And long as all shall charm my heart,
I'll love my little Lamp of gold--
  My Lamp and I shall never part.

And often, as she smiling said,
  In fancy's hour thy gentle rays
Shall guide my visionary tread
  Through poesy's enchanting maze.
Thy flame shall light the page refined,
  Where still we catch the Chian's breath,
  Where still the bard though cold in death,
Has left his soul unquenched behind.
Or, o'er thy humbler legend shine,
  Oh man of Ascra's dreary glades,
To whom the nightly warbling Nine
  A wand of inspiration gave,
Plucked from the greenest tree, that shades
The crystal of Castalia's wave.

Then, turning to a purer lore,
We'll cull the sage's deep-hid store,
From Science steal her golden clue,
And every mystic path pursue,
Where Nature, far from vulgar eyes,
Through labyrinths of wonder flies.
'Tis thus my heart shall learn to know
How fleeting is this world below,
Where all that meets the morning light,
Is changed before the fall of night!

I'll tell thee, as I trim thy fire,
  "Swift, swift the tide of being runs,
"And Time, who bids thy flame expire,
  "Will also quench yon heaven of suns."

Oh, then if earth's united power
Can never chain one feathery hour;
If every print we leave to-day
To-morrow's wave will sweep away;
Who pauses to inquire of heaven
Why were the fleeting treasures given,
The sunny days, the shady nights,
And all their brief but dear delights,
Which heaven has made for man to use,
And man should think it crime to lose?
Who that has culled a fresh-blown rose
Will ask it why it breathes and glows,
Unmindful of the blushing ray,
In which it shines its soul away;
Unmindful of the scented sigh,
With which it dies and loves to die.

Pleasure, thou only good on earth[2]
One precious moment given to thee--
Oh! by my Lais' lip, 'tis worth
  The sage's immortality.

Then far be all the wisdom hence,
  That would our joys one hour delay!
Alas, the feast of soul and sense
  Love calls us to in youth's bright day,
  If not soon tasted, fleets away.
Ne'er wert thou formed, my Lamp, to shed
  Thy splendor on a lifeless page;--
Whate'er my blushing Lais said
  Of thoughtful lore and studies sage,
'Twas mockery all--her glance of joy
Told me thy dearest, best employ.
And, soon, as night shall close the eye
  Of heaven's young wanderer in the west;
When seers are gazing on the sky,
  To find their future orbs of rest;
Then shall I take my trembling way,
  Unseen but to those worlds above,
And, led by thy mysterious ray,
  Steal to the night-bower of my love.


[1] It does not appear to have been very difficult to become a
philosopher amongst the ancients. A moderate store of learning, with a
considerable portion of confidence, and just wit enough to produce an
occasional apophthegm, seem to have been all the qualifications necessary
for the purpose.

[2] Aristippus considered motion as the principle of happiness,
in which idea he differed from the Epicureans, who looked to a state of
repose as the only true voluptuousness, and avoided even the too lively
agitations of pleasure, as a violent and ungraceful derangement of the
senses.






TO MRS,---.

ON HER BEAUTIFUL TRANSLATION OF VOITURE'S KISS.


    _Mon ame sur mon lvre toit lors toute entire.
    Pour savourer le miel qui sur la votre toit;
    Mais en me retirant, elle resta derrire,
      Tant de ce doux plaisir l'amorce l'a restoit_.
                      VOITURE.


How heavenly was the poet's doom,
  To breathe his spirit through a kiss:
And lose within so sweet a tomb
  The trembling messenger of bliss!

And, sure his soul returned to feel
  That it _again_ could ravished be;
For in the kiss that thou didst steal,
  His life and soul have fled to thee.






RONDEAU.


"Good night! good night!"--And is it so?
And must I from my Rosa go?
Oh Rosa, say "Good night!" once more,
And I'll repeat it o'er and o'er,
Till the first glance of dawning light
Shall find us saying, still, "Good night."

And still "Good night," my Rosa, say--
But whisper still, "A minute stay;"
And I will stay, and every minute
Shall have an age of transport in it;
Till Time himself shall stay his flight,
To listen to our sweet "Good night."

"Good night!" you'll murmur with a sigh,
And tell me it is time to fly:
And I will vow, will swear to go,
While still that sweet voice murmurs "No!"
Till slumber seal our weary sight--
And then, my love, my soul, "Good night!"






SONG.


Why does azure deck the sky?
  'Tis to be like thy looks of blue.
Why is red the rose's dye?
  Because it is thy blushes' hue.
All that's fair, by Love's decree,
  Has been made resembling thee!

Why is falling snow so white,
  But to be like thy bosom fair!
Why are solar beams so bright?
  That they may seem thy golden hair!
All that's bright, by Love's decree,
Has been made resembling thee!

Why are nature's beauties felt?
 Oh! 'tis thine in her we see!
Why has music power to melt?
 Oh! because it speaks like thee.
All that's sweet, by Love's decree,
Has been made resembling thee!






TO ROSA.


Like one who trusts to summer skies,
  And puts his little bark to sea,
Is he who, lured by smiling eyes,
  Consigns his simple heart to thee.

For fickle is the summer wind,
  And sadly may the bark be tost;
For thou art sure to change thy mind,
  And then the wretched heart is lost!






WRITTEN IN A COMMONPLACE BOOK, CALLED "THE BOOK OF FOLLIES;"
IN WHICH EVERY ONE THAT OPENED IT WAS TO CONTRIBUTE SOMETHING.

TO THE BOOK OF FOLLIES.


This tribute's from a wretched elf,
Who hails thee, emblem of himself.
The book of life, which I have traced,
Has been, like thee, a motley waste
Of follies scribbled o'er and o'er,
One folly bringing hundreds more.
Some have indeed been writ so neat,
In characters so fair, so sweet,
That those who judge not too severely,
Have said they loved such follies dearly!
Yet still, O book! the allusion stands;
For these were penned by _female_ hands:
The rest--alas! I own the truth--
Have all been scribbled so uncouth
That Prudence, with a withering look,
Disdainful, flings away the book.
Like thine, its pages here and there
Have oft been stained with blots of care;
And sometimes hours of peace, I own,
Upon some fairer leaves have shone,
White as the snowings of that heaven
By which those hours of peace were given;
But now no longer--such, oh, such
The blast of Disappointment's touch!--
No longer now those hours appear;
Each leaf is sullied by a tear:
Blank, blank is every page with care,
Not even a folly brightens there.
Will they yet brighten?--never, never!
Then _shut the book_, O God, for ever!






TO ROSA.


Say, why should the girl of my soul be in tears
  At a meeting of rapture like this,
When the glooms of the past and the sorrow of years
  Have been paid by one moment of bliss?

Are they shed for that moment of blissful delight,
  Which dwells on her memory yet?
Do they flow, like the dews of the love-breathing night,
  From the warmth of the sun that has set?

Oh! sweet is the tear on that languishing smile,
  That smile, which is loveliest then;
And if such are the drops that delight can beguile,
  Thou shalt weep them again and again.






LIGHT SOUNDS THE HARP.


Light sounds the harp when the combat is over,
  When heroes are resting, and joy is in bloom;
When laurels hang loose from the brow of the lover,
  And Cupid makes wings of the warrior's plume.
     But, when the foe returns,
     Again the hero burns;
High flames the sword in his hand once more:
     The clang of mingling arms
     Is then the sound that charms,
And brazen notes of war, that stirring trumpets pour;--
Then, again comes the Harp, when the combat is over--
  When heroes are resting, and Joy is in bloom--
When laurels hang loose from the brow of the lover,
  And Cupid makes wings of the warrior's plume.
Light went the harp when the War-God, reclining,
  Lay lulled on the white arm of Beauty to rest,
When round his rich armor the myrtle hung twining,
  And flights of young doves made his helmet their nest.
     But, when the battle came,
     The hero's eye breathed flame:
Soon from his neck the white arm was flung;
     While, to his waking ear,
     No other sounds were dear
But brazen notes of war, by thousand trumpets sung.
But then came the light harp, when danger was ended,
  And Beauty once more lulled the War-God to rest;
When tresses of gold with his laurels lay blended,
  And flights of young doves made his helmet their nest.






FROM THE GREEK OF MELEAGER.


Fill high the cup with liquid flame,
And speak my Heliodora's name.
Repeat its magic o'er and o'er,
And let the sound my lips adore,
Live in the breeze, till every tone,
And word, and breath, speaks her alone.

Give me the wreath that withers there,
  It was but last delicious night,
It circled her luxuriant hair,
  And caught her eyes' reflected light.
Oh! haste, and twine it round my brow,
'Tis all of her that's left me now.
And see--each rosebud drops a tear,
To find the nymph no longer here--
No longer, where such heavenly charms
As hers _should_ be--within these arms.






SONG.


Fly from the world, O Bessy! to me,
  Thou wilt never find any sincerer;
I'll give up the world, O Bessy! for thee,
  I can never meet any that's dearer.
Then tell me no more, with a tear and a sigh,
  That our loves will be censured by many;
All, all have their follies, and who will deny
  That ours is the sweetest of any?

When your lip has met mine, in communion so sweet,
  Have we felt as if virtue forbid it?--
Have we felt as if heaven denied them to meet?--
  No, rather 'twas heaven that did it.
So innocent, love, is the joy we then sip,
  So little of wrong is there in it,
That I wish all my errors were lodged on your lip,
  And I'd kiss them away in a minute.

Then come to your lover, oh! fly to his shed,
  From a world which I know thou despisest;
And slumber will hover as light o'er our bed!
  As e'er on the couch of the wisest.
And when o'er our pillow the tempest is driven,
  And thou, pretty innocent, fearest,
I'll tell thee, it is not the chiding of heaven,
  'Tis only our lullaby, dearest.

And, oh! while, we lie on our deathbed, my love,
  Looking back on the scene of our errors,
A sigh from my Bessy shall plead then above,
  And Death be disarmed of his terrors,
And each to the other embracing will say,
  "Farewell! let us hope we're forgiven."
Thy last fading glance will illumine the way,
  And a kiss be our passport to heaven!






THE RESEMBLANCE.


    _---- vo cercand' io,
    Donna quant' e possibile in altrui
    La desiata vostra forma vera_.
           PETRARC, _Sonett_. 14.


Yes, if 'twere any common love,
  That led my pliant heart astray,
I grant, there's not a power above
  Could wipe the faithless crime away.

But 'twas my doom to err with one
  In every look so like to thee
That, underneath yon blessed sun
  So fair there are but thou and she

Both born of beauty, at a birth,
  She held with thine a kindred sway,
And wore the only shape on earth
  That could have lured my soul to stray.

Then blame me not, if false I be,
  'Twas love that waked the fond excess;
My heart had been more true to thee,
  Had mine eye prized thy beauty less.






FANNY, DEAREST.


Yes! had I leisure to sigh and mourn,
  Fanny, dearest, for thee I'd sigh;
And every smile on my cheek should turn
  To tears when thou art nigh.
But, between love, and wine, and sleep,
  So busy a life I live,
That even the time it would take to weep
  Is more than my heart can give.
Then bid me not to despair and pine,
  Fanny, dearest of all the dears!
The Love that's ordered to bathe in wine,
  Would be sure to take cold in tears.

Reflected bright in this heart of mine,
  Fanny, dearest, thy image lies;
But, ah, the mirror would cease to shine,
  If dimmed too often with sighs.
They lose the half of beauty's light,
  Who view it through sorrow's tear;
And 'tis but to see thee truly bright
  That I keep my eye-beam clear.
Then wait no longer till tears shall flow,
  Fanny, dearest--the hope is vain;
If sunshine cannot dissolve thy snow,
  I shall never attempt it with rain.






THE RING.

TO .... ....


No--Lady! Lady! keep the ring:
  Oh! think, how many a future year,
Of placid smile and downy wing,
  May sleep within its holy sphere.

Do not disturb their tranquil dream,
  Though love hath ne'er the mystery warmed;
Yet heaven will shed a soothing beam,
  To bless the bond itself hath formed.

But then, that eye, that burning eye,--
  Oh! it doth ask, with witching power,
If heaven can ever bless the tie
  Where love inwreaths no genial flower?

Away, away, bewildering look,
  Or all the boast of virtue's o'er;
Go--hie thee to the sage's book,
  And learn from him to feel no more.

I cannot warn thee: every touch,
  That brings my pulses close to thine,
Tells me I want thy aid as much--
  Even more, alas, than thou dost mine.

Yet, stay,--one hope, one effort yet--
  A moment turn those eyes a way,
And let me, if I can, forget
  The light that leads my soul astray.

Thou sayest, that we were born to meet,
  That our hearts bear one common seal;--
Think, Lady, think, how man's deceit
  Can seem to sigh and feign to feel.

When, o'er thy face some gleam of thought,
  Like daybeams through the morning air,
Hath gradual stole, and I have caught
  The feeling ere it kindled there;

The sympathy I then betrayed,
  Perhaps was but the child of art,
The guile of one, who long hath played
  With all these wily nets of heart.

Oh! thine is not my earliest vow;
  Though few the years I yet have told,
Canst thou believe I've lived till now,
  With loveless heart or senses cold?

No--other nymphs to joy and pain
  This wild and wandering heart hath moved;
With some it sported, wild and vain,
  While some it dearly, truly, loved.

The cheek to thine I fondly lay,
  To theirs hath been as fondly laid;
The words to thee I warmly say,
  To them have been as warmly said.

Then, scorn at once a worthless heart,
  Worthless alike, or fixt or free;
Think of the pure, bright soul thou art,
  And--love not me, oh love not me.

Enough--now, turn thine eyes again;
  What, still that look and still that sigh!
Dost thou not feel my counsel then?
  Oh! no, beloved,--nor do I.






TO THE INVISIBLE GIRL.


They try to persuade me, my dear little sprite,
That you're not a true daughter of ether and light,
Nor have any concern with those fanciful forms
That dance upon rainbows and ride upon storms;
That, in short, you're a woman; your lip and your eye
As mortal as ever drew gods from the sky.
But I _will_ not believe them--no, Science, to you
I have long bid a last and a careless adieu:
Still flying from Nature to study her laws,
And dulling delight by exploring its cause,
You forget how superior, for mortals below,
Is the fiction they dream to the truth that they know.
Oh! who, that has e'er enjoyed rapture complete,
Would ask _how_ we feel it, or _why_ it is sweet;
How rays are confused, or how particles fly
Through the medium refined of a glance or a sigh;
Is there one, who but once would not rather have known it,
Than written, with Harvey, whole volumes upon it?

  As for you, my sweet-voiced and invisible love,
You must surely be one of those spirits, that rove
By the bank where, at twilight, the poet reclines,
When the star of the west on his solitude shines,
And the magical fingers of fancy have hung
Every breeze with a sigh, every leaf with a tongue.
Oh! hint to him then, 'tis retirement alone
Can hallow his harp or ennoble its tone;
Like you, with a veil of seclusion between,
His song to the world let him utter unseen,
And like you, a legitimate child of the spheres,
Escape from the eye to enrapture the ears.

  Sweet spirit of mystery! how I should love,
In the wearisome ways I am fated to rove,
To have you thus ever invisibly nigh,
Inhaling for ever your song and your sigh!
Mid the crowds of the world and the murmurs of care,
I might sometimes converse with my nymph of the air,
And turn with distaste from the clamorous crew,
To steal in the pauses one whisper from you.
Then, come and be near me, for ever be mine,
We shall hold in the air a communion divine,
As sweet as, of old, was imagined to dwell
In the grotto of Numa, or Socrates' cell.
And oft, at those lingering moments of night,
When the heart's busy thoughts have put slumber to flight,
You shall come to my pillow and tell me of love,
Such as angel to angel might whisper above.
Sweet spirit!--and then, could you borrow the tone
Of that voice, to my ear like some fairy-song known,
The voice of the one upon earth, who has twined
With her being for ever my heart and my mind,
Though lonely and far from the light of her smile,
An exile, and weary and hopeless the while,
Could you shed for a moment her voice on my ear.
I will think, for that moment, that Cara is near;
That she comes with consoling enchantment to speak,
And kisses my eyelid and breathes on my cheek,
And tells me the night shall go rapidly by,
For the dawn of our hope, of our heaven is nigh.

Fair spirit! if such be your magical power,
It will lighten the lapse of full many an hour;
And, let fortune's realities frown as they will,
Hope, fancy, and Cara may smile for me still.






THE RING[1]

A TALE


    _Annulus ille viri._
    OVID. _"Amor." lib. ii. eleg. 15_.


The happy day at length arrived
  When Rupert was to wed
The fairest maid in Saxony,
  And take her to his bed.

As soon as morn was in the sky,
  The feast and sports began;
The men admired the happy maid,
  The maids the happy man.

In many a sweet device of mirth
  The day was past along;
And some the featly dance amused,
  And some the dulcet song.

The younger maids with Isabel
  Disported through the bowers,
And decked her robe, and crowned her head
  With motley bridal flowers.

The matrons all in rich attire,
  Within the castle walls,
Sat listening to the choral strains
  That echoed, through the halls.

Young Rupert and his friends repaired
  Unto a spacious court,
To strike the bounding tennis-ball
  In feat and manly sport.

The bridegroom on his finger wore
  The wedding-ring so bright,
Which was to grace the lily hand
  Of Isabel that night.

And fearing he might break the gem,
  Or lose it in the play,
Hie looked around the court, to see
  Where he the ring might lay.

Now, in the court a statue stood,
  Which there full long had been;
It might a Heathen goddess be,
  Or else, a Heathen queen.

Upon its marble finger then
  He tried the ring to fit;
And, thinking it was safest there,
  Thereon he fastened it.

And now the tennis sports went on,
  Till they were wearied all,
And messengers announced to them
  Their dinner in the hall,

Young Rupert for his wedding-ring
  Unto the statue went;
But, oh, how shocked was he to find
  The marble finger bent!

The hand was closed upon the ring
  With firm and mighty clasp;
In vain he tried and tried and tried,
  He could not loose the grasp!

Then sore surprised was Rupert's mind--
  As well his mind might be;
"I'll come," quoth he, "at night again,
  "When none are here to see."

He went unto the feast, and much
  He thought upon his ring;
And marvelled sorely what could mean
  So very strange a thing!

The feast was o'er, and to the court
  He hied without delay,
Resolved to break the marble hand
  And force the ring away.

But, mark a stranger wonder still--
  The ring was there no more
And yet the marble hand ungrasped,
  And open as before!

He searched the base, and all the court,
  But nothing could he find;
Then to the castle hied he back
  With sore bewildered mind.

Within he found them all in mirth,
  The night in dancing flew:
The youth another ring procured,
  And none the adventure knew.

And now the priest has joined their hands,
  The hours of love advance:
Rupert almost forgets to think
  Upon the morn's mischance.

Within the bed fair Isabel
  In blushing sweetness lay,
Like flowers, half-opened by the
    dawn,
  And waiting for the day.

And Rupert, by her lovely side,
  In youthful beauty glows,
Like Phoebus, when he bends to cast
  His beams upon a rose.

And here my song would leave them both,
  Nor let the rest be told,
If 'twere not for the horrid tale
  It yet has to unfold.

Soon Rupert, 'twixt his bride and him
  A death cold carcass found;
He saw it not, but thought he felt
  Its arms embrace him round.

He started up, and then returned,
  But found the phantom still;
In vain he shrunk, it clipt him
    round,
  With damp and deadly chill!

And when he bent, the earthy lips
  A kiss of horror gave;
'Twas like the smell from charnel vaults,
  Or from the mouldering grave!

Ill-fated Rupert!--wild and loud
  Then cried he to his wife,
"Oh! save me from this horrid fiend,
  "My Isabel! my life!"

But Isabel had nothing seen,
  She looked around in vain;
And much she mourned the mad conceit
  That racked her Rupert's brain.

At length from this invisible
  These words to Rupert came:
(Oh God! while he did hear the words
  What terrors shook his frame!)

"Husband, husband, I've the ring
  "Thou gavest to-day to me;
"And thou'rt to me for ever wed,
  "As I am wed to thee!"

And all the night the demon lay
  Cold-chilling by his side,
And strained him with such deadly grasp,
  He thought he should have died.

But when the dawn of day was near,
  The horrid phantom fled,
And left the affrighted youth to weep
  By Isabel in bed.

And all that day a gloomy cloud
  Was seen on Rupert's brows;
Fair Isabel was likewise sad,
  But strove to cheer her spouse.

And, as the day advanced, he thought
  Of coming night with fear:
Alas, that he should dread to view
  The bed that should be dear!

At length the second night arrived,
  Again their couch they prest;
Poor Rupert hoped that all was o'er,
  And looked for love and rest.

But oh! when midnight came, again
  The fiend was at his side,
And, as it strained him in its grasp,
  With howl exulting cried:--

"Husband, husband, I've the ring,
  "The ring thou gavest to me;
"And thou'rt to me for ever wed,
  "As I am wed to thee!",

In agony of wild despair,
  He started from the bed;
And thus to his bewildered wife
  The trembling Rupert said;

"Oh Isabel! dost thou not see
  "A shape of horrors here,
"That strains me to its deadly kiss,
  "And keeps me from my dear?"

"No, no, my love! my Rupert, I
  "No shape of horrors see;
"And much I mourn the fantasy
  "That keeps my dear from me."

This night, just like the night before,
  In terrors past away.
Nor did the demon vanish thence
  Before the dawn of day.

Said Rupert then, "My Isabel,
  "Dear partner of my woe.
"To Father Austin's holy cave
  "This instant will I go."

Now Austin was a reverend man,
  Who acted wonders maint--
Whom all the country round believed
  A devil or a saint!

To Father Austin's holy cave
  Then Rupert straightway went;
And told him all, and asked him how
  These horrors to prevent.

The father heard the youth, and then
  Retired awhile to pray:
And, having prayed for half an hour
  Thus to the youth did say:

"There is a place where four roads meet,
  "Which I will tell to thee;
"Be there this eve, at fall of night,
  "And list what thou shalt see.

"Thou'lt see a group of figures pass
  "In strange disordered crowd,
"Travelling by torchlight through the roads,
  "With noises strange and loud.

"And one that's high above the rest,
  "Terrific towering o'er,
"Will make thee know him at a glance,
  "So I need say no more.

"To him from me these tablets give,
  "They'll quick be understood;
"Thou need'st not fear, but give them straight,
  "I've scrawled them with my blood!"

The night-fall came, and Rupert all
  In pale amazement went
To where the cross-roads met, as he
  Was by the Father sent.

And lo! a group of figures came
  In strange disordered crowd.
Travelling by torchlight through the roads,
  With noises strange and loud.

And, as the gloomy train advanced,
  Rupert beheld from far
A female form of wanton mien
  High seated on a car.

And Rupert, as he gazed upon
  The loosely-vested dame,
Thought of the marble statue's look,
  For hers was just the same.

Behind her walked a hideous form,
  With eyeballs flashing death;
Whene'er he breathed, a sulphured smoke
  Came burning in his breath.

He seemed the first of all the crowd,
  Terrific towering o'er;
"Yes, yes," said Rupert, "this is he,
  "And I need ask no more."

Then slow he went, and to this fiend
  The tablets trembling gave,
Who looked and read them with a yell
  That would disturb the grave.

And when he saw the blood-scrawled name,
  His eyes with fury shine;
"I thought," cries he, "his time was out,
  "But he must soon be mine!"

Then darting at the youth a look
  Which rent his soul with fear,
He went unto the female fiend,
  And whispered in her ear.

The female fiend no sooner heard
  Than, with reluctant look,
The very ring that Rupert lost,
  She from her finger took.

And, giving it unto the youth,
  With eyes that breathed of hell,
She said, in that tremendous voice,
  Which he remembered well:

"In Austin's name take back the ring,
  "The ring thou gavest to me;
"And thou'rt to me no longer wed,
  "Nor longer I to thee."

He took the ring, the rabble past.
  He home returned again;
His wife was then the happiest fair,
  The happiest he of men.


[1] I should be sorry to think that my friend had any serious intentions
of frightening the nursery by this story; I rather hope--though the manner
of it leads me to doubt--that his design was to ridicule that distempered
taste which prefers those monsters of the fancy to the _"speciosa
miracula"_ of true poetic imagination.






TO .... ....

ON SEEING HER WITH A WHITE VEIL AND A RICH GIRDLE.


Put off the vestal Veil, nor, oh!
  Let weeping angels View it;
Your cheeks belie its virgin snow.
  And blush repenting through it.

Put off the fatal zone you wear;
  The shining pearls around it
Are tears, that fell from Virtue there,
  The hour when Love unbound it.






WRITTEN IN THE BLANK LEAF OF A LADY'S COMMONPLACE BOOK.


Here is one leaf reserved for me,
From all thy sweet memorials free;
And here my simple song might tell
The feelings thou must guess so well.
But could I thus, within thy mind,
One little vacant corner find,
Where no impression yet is seen,
Where no memorial yet hath been,
Oh! it should be my sweetest care
To _write my name_ for ever _there_!






TO MRS. BL----.

WRITTEN IN HER ALBUM.


They say that Love had once a book
  (The urchin likes to copy you),
Where, all who came, the pencil took,
  And wrote, like us, a line or two.

'Twas Innocence, the maid divine,
  Who kept this volume bright and fair.
And saw that no unhallowed line
  Or thought profane should enter there;

And daily did the pages fill
  With fond device and loving lore,
And every leaf she turned was still
  More bright than that she turned before.

Beneath the touch of Hope, how soft,
  How light the magic pencil ran!
Till Fear would come, alas, as oft,
  And trembling close what Hope began.

A tear or two had dropt from Grief,
  And Jealousy would, now and then,
Ruffle in haste some snow-white leaf,
  Which Love had still to smooth again.

But, ah! there came a blooming boy,
  Who often turned the pages o'er,
And wrote therein such words of joy,
  That all who read them sighed for more.

And Pleasure was this spirit's name,
  And though so soft his voice and look,
Yet Innocence, whene'er he came,
  Would tremble for her spotless book.

For, oft a Bacchant cup he bore,
  With earth's sweet nectar sparkling bright;
And much she feared lest, mantling o'er,
Some drops should on the pages light.

And so it chanced, one luckless night,
  The urchin let that goblet fall
O'er the fair book, so pure, so white,
  And sullied lines and marge and all!

In vain now, touched with shame, he tried
  To wash those fatal stains away;
Deep, deep had sunk the sullying tide,
  The leaves grew darker everyday.

And Fancy's sketches lost their hue,
  And Hope's sweet lines were all effaced,
And Love himself now scarcely knew
  What Love himself so lately traced.

At length the urchin Pleasure fled,
  (For how, alas! could Pleasure stay?)
And Love, while many a tear he shed,
  Reluctant flung the book away.

The index now alone remains.
  Of all the pages spoiled by Pleasure,
And though it bears some earthly stains,
  Yet Memory counts the leaf a treasure.

And oft, they say, she scans it o'er,
  And oft, by this memorial aided,
Brings back the pages now no more,
  And thinks of lines that long have faded.

I know not if this tale be true,
  But thus the simple facts are stated;
And I refer their truth to you,
  Since Love and you are near related.






TO CARA,

AFTER AN INTERVAL OF ABSENCE.


Concealed within the shady wood
  A mother left her sleeping child,
And flew, to cull her rustic food,
  The fruitage of the forest wild.

But storms upon her pathway rise,
  The mother roams, astray and weeping;
Far from the weak appealing cries
  Of him she left so sweetly sleeping.

She hopes, she fears; a light is seen,
  And gentler blows the night wind's breath;
Yet no--'tis gone--the storms are keen,
  The infant may be chilled to death!

Perhaps, even now, in darkness shrouded,
  His little eyes lie cold and still;--
And yet, perhaps, they are not clouded,
  Life and love may light them still.

Thus, Cara, at our last farewell,
  When, fearful even thy hand to touch,
I mutely asked those eyes to tell
  If parting pained thee half so much:

I thought,--and, oh! forgive the thought,
  For none was e'er by love inspired
Whom fancy had not also taught
  To hope the bliss his soul desired.

Yes, I _did_ think, in Cara's mind,
  Though yet to that sweet mind unknown,
I left one infant wish behind,
  One feeling, which I called my own.

Oh blest! though but in fancy blest,
  How did I ask of Pity's care,
To shield and strengthen, in thy breast,
  The nursling I had cradled there.

And, many an hour, beguiled by pleasure,
  And many an hour of sorrow numbering,
I ne'er forgot the new-born treasure,
  I left within thy bosom slumbering.

Perhaps, indifference has not chilled it,
  Haply, it yet a throb may give--
Yet, no--perhaps, a doubt has killed it;
  Say, dearest--_does_ the feeling live?






TO CARA,

ON THE DAWNING OF A NEW YEAR'S DAY.


When midnight came to close the year,
  We sighed to think it thus should take
The hours it gave us--hours as dear
  As sympathy and love could make
Their blessed moments,--every sun
Saw us, my love, more closely one.

But, Cara, when the dawn was nigh
  Which came a new year's light to shed,
That smile we caught from eye to eye
  Told us, those moments were not fled:
Oh, no,--we felt, some future sun
Should see us still more closely one.

Thus may we ever, side by side,
From happy years to happier glide;
And still thus may the passing sigh
  We give to hours, that vanish o'er us,
Be followed by the smiling eye,
  That Hope shall shed on scenes before us!






TO ......., 1801.


To be the theme of every hour
The heart devotes to Fancy's power,
When her prompt magic fills the mind
With friends and joys we've left behind,
And joys return and friends are near,
And all are welcomed with a tear:--
In the mind's purest seat to dwell,
To be remembered oft and well
By one whose heart, though vain and wild,
By passion led, by youth beguiled,
Can proudly still aspire to be
All that may yet win smiles from thee:--
If thus to live in every part
Of a lone, weary wanderer's heart;
If thus to be its sole employ
Can give thee one faint gleam of joy,
Believe it. Mary,--oh! believe
A tongue that never can deceive,
Though, erring, it too oft betray
Even more than Love should dare to say,--
In Pleasure's dream or Sorrow's hour,
In crowded hall or lonely bower,
The business of my life shall be,
For ever to remember thee.
And though that heart be dead to mine,
Since Love is life and wakes not thine,
I'll take thy image, as the form
Of one whom Love had failed to warm,
Which, though it yield no answering thrill,
Is not less dear, is worshipt still--
I'll take it, wheresoe'er I stray,
The bright, cold burden of my way.
To keep this semblance fresh in bloom,
My heart shall be its lasting tomb,
And Memory, with embalming care,
Shall keep it fresh and fadeless there.






THE GENIUS OF HARMONY.

AN IRREGULAR ODE.


    _Ad harmoniam canere mundum_.
    CICERO _"de Nat. Deor." lib. iii_.


  There lies a shell beneath the waves,
  In many a hollow winding wreathed,
      Such as of old
Echoed the breath that warbling sea-maids breathed;
      This magic shell,
  From the white bosom of a syren fell,
As once she wandered by the tide that laves
      Sicilia's sands of gold.
        It bears
  Upon its shining side the mystic notes
    Of those entrancing airs,[1]
  The genii of the deep were wont to swell,
When heaven's eternal orbs their midnight music rolled!
  Oh! seek it, wheresoe'er it floats;
      And, if the power
Of thrilling numbers to thy soul be dear,

  Go, bring the bright shell to my bower,
  And I will fold thee in such downy dreams
  As lap the Spirit of the Seventh Sphere,
When Luna's distant tone falls faintly on his ear![2]
      And thou shalt own,
  That, through the circle of creation's zone,
  Where matter slumbers or where spirit beams;
  From the pellucid tides,[3] that whirl
  The planets through their maze of song,
  To the small rill, that weeps along
    Murmuring o'er beds of pearl;
        From the rich sigh
Of the sun's arrow through an evening sky,[4]
To the faint breath the tuneful osier yields
        On Afric's burning fields;[5]
  Thou'lt wondering own this universe divine
        Is mine!
  That I respire in all and all in me,
One mighty mingled soul of boundless harmony.

    Welcome, welcome, mystic shell!
    Many a star has ceased to burn,[6]
    Many a tear has Saturn's urn
  O'er the cold bosom of the ocean wept,
    Since thy aerial spell
    Hath in the waters slept.
        Now blest I'll fly
  With the bright treasure to my choral sky,
    Where she, who waked its early swell,
    The Syren of the heavenly choir.
Walks o'er the great string of my Orphic Lyre;
  Or guides around the burning pole
  The winged chariot of some blissful soul:
        While thou--
Oh son of earth, what dreams shall rise for thee!
    Beneath Hispania's sun,
    Thou'll see a streamlet run,
  Which I've imbued with breathing melody;[7]
And there, when night-winds down the current die,
Thou'lt hear how like a harp its waters sigh:
A liquid chord is every wave that flows,
An airy plectrum every breeze that blows.

  There, by that wondrous stream,
  Go, lay thy languid brow,
And I will send thee such a godlike dream,
As never blest the slumbers even of him,[8]
Who, many a night, with his primordial lyre,
    Sate on the chill Pangaean mount,[9]
  And, looking to the orient dim,
Watched the first flowing of that sacred fount,
From which his soul had drunk its fire.
Oh think what visions, in that lonely hour,
  Stole o'er his musing breast;
      What pious ecstasy
Wafted his prayer to that eternal Power,
Whose seal upon this new-born world imprest
The various forms of bright divinity!
  Or, dost thou know what dreams I wove,
  Mid the deep horror of that silent bower,[10]
Where the rapt Samian slept his holy slumber?
      When, free
    From every earthly chain,
From wreaths of pleasure and from bonds of pain,
  His spirit flew through fields above,
Drank at the source of nature's fontal number,
And saw, in mystic choir, around him move
The stars of song, Heaven's burning minstrelsy!
  Such dreams, so heavenly bright,
      I swear
By the great diadem that twines my hair,
And by the seven gems that sparkle there,
      Mingling their beams
  In a soft iris of harmonious light,
Oh, mortal! such shall be thy radiant dreams.

       *       *       *       *       *

I found her not--the chamber seemed
  Like some divinely haunted place
Where fairy forms had lately beamed,
  And left behind their odorous trace!

It felt as if her lips had shed
A sigh around her, ere she fled,
Which hung, as on a melting lute,
When all the silver chords are mute,
There lingers still a trembling breath
After the note's luxurious death,
A shade of song, a spirit air
Of melodies which had been there.

I saw the veil, which, all the day,
  Had floated o'er her cheek of rose;
I saw the couch, where late she lay
  In languor of divine repose;
And I could trace the hallowed print
  Her limbs had left, as pure and warm,
As if 'twere done in rapture's mint,
  And Love himself had stamped the form.

Oh my sweet mistress, where wert thou?
  In pity fly not thus from me;
Thou art my life, my essence now,
  And my soul dies of wanting thee.


[1] In the "Histoire Naturelle des Antilles," there is an account of some
curious shells, found at Curaoa, on the back of which were lines, filled
with musical characters so distinct and perfect, that the writer assures
us a very charming trio was sung from one of them. The author adds, a poet
might imagine that these shells were used by the syrens at their concerts.

[2] According to Cicero, and his commentator, Macrobius, the lunar tone is
the gravest and faintest on the planetary heptachord.

[3] Leucippus, the atomist, imagined a kind of vortices in the heavens,
which he borrowed from Anaxagoras, and possibly suggested to Descartes.

[4] Heraclides, upon the allegories of Homer, conjectures that the idea of
the harmony of the spheres originated with this poet, who, in representing
the solar beams as arrows, supposes them to emit a peculiar sound in the
air.

[5] In the account of Africa which D'Ablancourt has translated, there is
mention of a tree in that country, whose branches, when shaken by the hand
produce very sweet sounds.

[6] Alluding to the extinction, or at least the disappearance, of some of
those fixed stars, which we are taught to consider as suns, attended each
by its system. Descartes thought that our earth might formerly have been a
sun, which became obscured by a thick incrustation over its surface. This
probably suggested the idea of a central fire.

[7] This musical river is mentioned in the romance of Achilles Tatius.

[8] Orpheus.

[9] Eratosthenes, in mentioning the extreme veneration of Orpheus for
Apollo, says that he was accustomed to go to the Pangaean mountain at
daybreak, and there wait the rising of the sun, that he might be the first
to hail its beams.

[10] Alluding to the cave near Samos, where Pythagoras devoted the greater
part of his days and nights to meditation and the mysteries of his
philosophy.






TO MRS. HENRY TIGHE,

ON READING HER "PSYCHE."


Tell me the witching tale again,
  For never has my heart or ear
Hung on so sweet, so pure a strain,
  So pure to feel, so sweet to hear.

Say, Love, in all thy prime of fame,
  When the high heaven itself was thine;
When piety confest the flame,
  And even thy errors were divine;

Did ever Muse's hand, so fair,
  A glory round thy temple spread?
Did ever lip's ambrosial air
  Such fragrance o'er thy altars shed?

One maid there was, who round her lyre
  The mystic myrtle wildly wreathed;--
But all _her_ sighs were sighs of fire,
  The myrtle withered as she breathed.

Oh! you that love's celestial dream,
  In all its purity, would know,
Let not the senses' ardent beam
  Too strongly through the vision glow.

Love safest lies, concealed in night,
  The night where heaven has bid him lie;
Oh! shed not there unhallowed light,
  Or, Psyche knows, the boy will fly.

Sweet Psyche, many a charmed hour,
  Through many a wild and magic waste,
To the fair fount and blissful bower
  Have I, in dreams, thy light foot traced!

Where'er thy joys are numbered now,
  Beneath whatever shades of rest,
The Genius of the starry brow
  Hath bound thee to thy Cupid's breast;

Whether above the horizon dim,
  Along whose verge our spirits stray,--
Half sunk beneath the shadowy rim,
  Half brightened by the upper ray,[1]--

Thou dwellest in a world, all light,
  Or, lingering here, doth love to be,
To other souls, the guardian bright
  That Love was, through this gloom, to thee;

Still be the song to Psyche dear,
  The song, whose gentle voice was given
To be, on earth, to mortal ear,
  An echo of her own, in heaven.


[1] By this image the Platonists expressed the middle state of the soul
between sensible and intellectual existence.






FROM THE HIGH PRIEST OF APOLLO TO A VIRGIN OF DELPHI.[1]


    _Cum digno digna_.....
                       SULPICIA.


"Who is the maid, with golden hair,
"With eye of fire, and foot of air,
"Whose harp around my altar swells,
"The sweetest of a thousand shells?"
'Twas thus the deity, who treads
The arch of heaven, and proudly sheds
Day from his eyelids--thus he spoke,
As through my cell his glories broke.

  Aphelia is the Delphic fair[2]
With eyes of fire and golden hair,
Aphelia's are the airy feet.
And hers the harp divinely sweet;
For foot so light has never trod
The laurelled caverns of the god.
Nor harp so soft hath ever given
A sigh to earth or hymn to heaven.

  "Then tell the virgin to unfold,
"In looser pomp, her locks of gold,
"And bid those eyes more fondly shine
"To welcome down a Spouse Divine;
"Since He, who lights the path of years--
"Even from the fount of morning's tears
"To where his setting splendors burn
"Upon the western sea-maid's urn--
"Doth not, in all his course, behold
"Such eyes of fire, such hair of gold.
"Tell her, he comes, in blissful pride,
"His lip yet sparkling with the tide
"That mantles in Olympian bowls,--
"The nectar of eternal souls!
"For her, for her he quits the skies,
"And to her kiss from nectar flies.
"Oh, he would quit his star-throned height,
"And leave the world to pine for light,
"Might he but pass the hours of shade,
"Beside his peerless Delphic maid,
"She, more than earthly woman blest,
"He, more than god on woman's breast!"

  There is a cave beneath the steep,[3]
Where living rills of crystal weep
O'er herbage of the loveliest hue
That ever spring begemmed with dew:
There oft the greensward's glossy tint
Is brightened by the recent print
Of many a faun and naiad's feet,--
Scarce touching earth, their step so fleet,--
That there, by moonlight's ray, had trod,
In light dance, o'er the verdant sod.
"There, there," the god, impassioned, said,
"Soon as the twilight tinge is fled,
"And the dim orb of lunar souls
"Along its shadowy pathway rolls--
"There shall we meet,--and not even He,
"The God who reigns immortally,
"Where Babel's turrets paint their pride
"Upon the Euphrates' shining tide,[4]--
"Not even when to his midnight loves
"In mystic majesty he moves,
"Lighted by many an odorous fire,
"And hymned by all Chaldaea's choir,--
"E'er yet, o'er mortal brow, let shine
"Such effluence of Love Divine,
"As shall to-night, blest maid, o'er thine."

  Happy the maid, whom heaven allows
To break for heaven her virgin vows!
Happy the maid!--her robe of shame
Is whitened by a heavenly flame,
Whose glory, with a lingering trace,
Shines through and deifies her race!


[1] This poem, as well as a few others in the following volume, formed
part of a work which I had early projected, and even announced to the
public, but which, luckily, perhaps, for myself, had been interrupted by
my visit to America in the year 1803.

[2] In the 9th Pythic of Pindar, where Apollo, in the same manner,
requires of Chiron some information respecting the fair Cyrene, the
Centaur, in obeying, very gravely apologizes for telling the God what his
omniscience must know so perfectly already.

[3] The Corycian Cave, which Pausanias mentions. The inhabitants of
Parnassus held it sacred to the Corycian nymphs, who were children of the
river Plistus.

[4] The temple of Jupiter Belus, at Babylon; in one of whose towers there
was a large chapel set apart for these celestial assignations. "No man is
allowed to sleep here," says Herodotus; "but the apartment is appropriated
to a female, whom, if we believe the Chaldaean priests, the deity selects
from the women of the country, as his favorite."






FRAGMENT.


Pity me, love! I'll pity thee,
If thou indeed hast felt like me.
All, all my bosom's peace is o'er!
At night, which _was_ my hour of calm,
When from the page of classic lore,
From the pure fount of ancient lay
My soul has drawn the placid balm,
Which charmed its every grief away,
Ah! there I find that balm no more.
Those spells, which make us oft forget
The fleeting troubles of the day,
In deeper sorrows only whet
The stings they cannot tear away.
When to my pillow racked I fly,
With weary sense and wakeful eye.
While my brain maddens, where, oh, where
Is that serene consoling prayer,
Which once has harbingered my rest,
When the still soothing voice of Heaven
Hath seemed to whisper in my breast,
"Sleep on, thy errors are forgiven!"
No, though I still in semblance pray,
My thoughts are wandering far away,
And even the name of Deity
Is murmured out in sighs for thee.






A NIGHT THOUGHT.


How oft a cloud, with envious veil,
  Obscures yon bashful light,
Which seems so modestly to steal
  Along the waste of night!

'Tis thus the world's obtrusive wrongs
  Obscure with malice keen
Some timid heart, which only longs
  To live and die unseen.






THE KISS.


Grow to my lip, thou sacred kiss,
On which my soul's beloved swore
That there should come a time of bliss,
When she would mock my hopes no more.
And fancy shall thy glow renew,
In sighs at morn, and dreams at night,
And none shall steal thy holy dew
Till thou'rt absolved by rapture's rite.
Sweet hours that are to make me blest,
Fly, swift as breezes, to the goal,
And let my love, my more than soul,
Come blushing to this ardent breast.
Then, while in every glance I drink
The rich overflowing of her mind,
Oh! let her all enamored sink
In sweet abandonment resigned,
Blushing for all our struggles past,
And murmuring, "I am thine at last!"






SONG.


Think on that look whose melting ray
  For one sweet moment mixt with mine,
And for that moment seemed to say,
  "I dare not, or I would be thine!"

Think on thy every smile and glance,
  On all thou hast to charm and move;
And then forgive my bosom's trance,
  Nor tell me it is sin to love.

Oh, _not_ to love thee were the sin;
  For sure, if Fate's decrees be done,
Thou, thou art destined still to win,
  As I am destined to be won!






THE CATALOGUE.


"Come, tell me," says Rosa, as kissing and kist,
  One day she reclined on my breast;
"Come, tell me the number, repeat me the list
  "Of the nymphs you have loved and carest."--
Oh Rosa! 'twas only my fancy that roved,
  My heart at the moment was free;
But I'll tell thee, my girl, how many I've loved,
  And the number shall finish with thee.

My tutor was Kitty; in infancy wild
  She taught me the way to be blest;
She taught me to love her, I loved like a child,
  But Kitty could fancy the rest.
This lesson of dear and enrapturing lore
  I have never forgot, I allow:
I have had it _by rote_ very often before,
  But never _by heart_ until now.

Pretty Martha was next, and my soul was all flame,
  But my head was so full of romance
That I fancied her into some chivalry dame,
  And I was her knight of the lance.
But Martha was not of this fanciful school,
  And she laughed at her poor little knight;
While I thought her a goddess, she thought me a fool,
  And I'll swear _she_ was most in the right.

My soul was now calm, till, by Cloris's looks,
  Again I was tempted to rove;
But Cloris, I found, was so learned in books
  That she gave me more logic than love.
So I left this young Sappho, and hastened to fly
  To those sweeter logicians in bliss,
Who argue the point with a soul-telling eye,
  And convince us at once with a kiss.

Oh! Susan was then all the world unto me,
  But Susan was piously given;
And the worst of it was, we could never agree
  On the road that was shortest to Heaven.
"Oh, Susan!" I've said, in the moments of mirth,
  "What's devotion to thee or to me?
"I devoutly believe there's a heaven on earth,
  "And believe that that heaven's in _thee_!"






IMITATION OF CATULLUS.

TO HIMSELF.


    _Miser Catulle, desinas ineptire_, etc.


Cease the sighing fool to play;
Cease to trifle life away;
Nor vainly think those joys thine own,
Which all, alas, have falsely flown.
What hours, Catullus, once were thine.
How fairly seemed thy day to shine,
When lightly thou didst fly to meet
The girl whose smile was then so sweet--
The girl thou lovedst with fonder pain
Than e'er thy heart can feel again.

  Ye met--your souls seemed all in one,
Like tapers that commingling shone;
Thy heart was warm enough for both,
And hers, in truth, was nothing loath.

  Such were the hours that once were thine;
But, ah! those hours no longer shine.
For now the nymph delights no more
In what she loved so much before;
And all Catullus now can do,
Is to be proud and frigid too;

Nor follow where the wanton flies,
Nor sue the bliss that she denies.
False maid! he bids farewell to thee,
To love, and all love's misery;
The heyday of his heart is o'er,
Nor will he court one favor more.

  Fly, perjured girl!--but whither fly?
Who now will praise thy cheek and eye?
Who now will drink the syren tone,
Which tells him thou art all his own?
Oh, none:--and he who loved before
Can never, never love thee more.

       *       *       *       *       *

    _"Neither do I condemn thee; go, and sin no more_!"
    --ST. JOHN, chap. viii.

Oh woman, if through sinful wile
  Thy soul hath strayed from honor's track,
'Tis mercy only can beguile,
  By gentle ways, the wanderer back.

The stain that on thy virtue lies,
  Washed by those tears, not long will stay;
As clouds that sully morning skies
  May all be wept in showers away.

Go, go, be innocent,--and live;
  The tongues of men may wound thee sore;
But Heaven in pity can forgive,
  And bids thee "go, and sin no more!"






NONSENSE.


Good reader! if you e'er have seen,
  When Phoebus hastens to his pillow,
The mermaids, with their tresses green,
  Dancing upon the western billow:
If you have seen, at twilight dim,
When the lone spirit's vesper hymn
  Floats wild along the winding shore,
If you have seen, through mist of eve,
The fairy train their ringlets weave,
Glancing along the spangled green:--
  If you have seen all this, and more,
God bless me, what a deal you've seen!






EPIGRAM.

FROM THE FRENCH.


"I never gave a kiss (says Prue),
  "To naughty man, for I abhor it."
She will not _give_ a kiss, 'tis true;
  She'll _take_ one though, and thank you for it.






ON A SQUINTING POETESS.


To no _one_ Muse does she her glance confine,
But has an eye, at once, to _all the Nine_!






TO .... ....


    _Maria pur quando vuol, non  bisogna mutar ni faccia ni voce per
    esser un Angelo_.[1]


Die when you will, you need not wear
At Heaven's Court a form more fair
  Than Beauty here on earth has given;
Keep but the lovely looks we see--
The voice we hear--and you will be
  An angel ready-made for Heaven!


[1] The words addressed by Lord Herbert of Cherbury to the beautiful Nun
at Murano.--_See his Life_.






TO ROSA.


    _A far conserva, e cumulo d'amanti.
    "Past. Fid_."


And are you then a thing of art,
  Seducing all, and loving none;
And have I strove to gain a heart
  Which every coxcomb thinks his own?

Tell me at once if this be true,
  And I will calm my jealous breast;
Will learn to join the dangling crew,
  And share your simpers with the rest.

But if your heart be _not_ so free,--
  Oh! if another share that heart,
Tell not the hateful tale to me,
  But mingle mercy with your art.

I'd rather think you "false as hell,"
  Than find you to be all divine,--
Than know that heart could love so well,
  Yet know that heart would not be mine!






TO PHILLIS.


Phillis, you little rosy rake,
  That heart of yours I long to rifle;
Come, give it me, and do not make
  So much ado about a _trifle_!






TO A LADY.

ON HER SINGING.


Thy song has taught my heart to feel
  Those soothing thoughts of heavenly love,
Which o'er the sainted spirits steal
  When listening to the spheres above!

When, tired of life and misery,
  I wish to sigh my latest breath,
Oh, Emma! I will fly to thee,
  And thou shalt sing me into death.

And if along thy lip and cheek
  That smile of heavenly softness play,
Which,--ah! forgive a mind that's weak,--
  So oft has stolen my mind away.

Thou'lt seem an angel of the sky,
  That comes to charm me into bliss:
I'll gaze and die--Who would not die,
  If death were half so sweet as this?






SONG.

ON THE BIRTHDAY OF MRS. ----.

WRITTEN IN IRELAND. 1799.


Of all my happiest hours of joy,
  And even I have had my measure,
When hearts were full, and every eye
  Hath kindled with the light of pleasure,
An hour like this I ne'er was given,
  So full of friendship's purest blisses;
Young Love himself looks down from heaven,
  To smile on such a day as this is.
    Then come, my friends, this hour improve,
      Let's feel as if we ne'er could sever;
And may the birth of her we love
Be thus with joy remembered ever!

Oh! banish every thought to-night,
  Which could disturb our soul's communion;
Abandoned thus to dear delight,
  We'll even for once forget the Union!
On that let statesmen try their powers,
  And tremble o'er the rights they'd die for;
The union of the soul be ours,
  And every union else we sigh for.
    Then come, my friends, etc.

In every eye around I mark
  The feelings of the heart o'er-flowing;
From every soul I catch the spark
  Of sympathy, in friendship glowing.
Oh! could such moments ever fly;
  Oh! that we ne'er were doomed to lose 'em;
And all as bright as Charlotte's eye,
  And all as pure as Charlotte's bosom.
    Then come, my friends, etc.

For me, whate'er my span of years,
  Whatever sun may light my roving;
Whether I waste my life in tears,
  Or live, as now, for mirth and loving;
This day shall come with aspect kind,
  Wherever fate may cast your rover;
He'll think of those he left behind,
  And drink a health to bliss that's over!
    Then come, my friends, etc.






SONG.[1]


Mary, I believed thee true,
  And I was blest in thus believing
But now I mourn that e'er I knew
  A girl so fair and so deceiving.
    Fare thee well.

Few have ever loved like me,--
  Yes, I have loved thee too sincerely!
And few have e'er deceived like thee.--
  Alas! deceived me too severely.

Fare thee well!--yet think awhile
  On one whose bosom bleeds to doubt thee:
Who now would rather trust that smile,
  And die with thee than live without thee.

Fare thee well! I'll think of thee.
  Thou leavest me many a bitter token;
For see, distracting woman, see,
  My peace is gone, my heart is broken!--
    Fare thee well!


[1] These words were written to the pathetic Scotch air "Galla Water."






MORALITY.

A FAMILIAR EPISTLE.

ADDRESSED TO J. ATKINSON, ESQ. M. R. I. A.


Though long at school and college dozing.
O'er books of verse and books of prosing,
And copying from their moral pages
Fine recipes for making sages;
Though long with' those divines at school,
Who think to make us good by rule;
Who, in methodic forms advancing,
Teaching morality like dancing,
Tell us, for Heaven or money's sake.
What _steps_ we are through life to take:
Though thus, my friend, so long employed,
With so much midnight oil destroyed,
I must confess my searches past,
I've only learned _to doubt_ at last
I find the doctors and the sages
Have differed in all climes and ages,
And two in fifty scarce agree
On what is pure morality.
'Tis like the rainbow's shifting zone,
And every vision makes its own.

  The doctors of the Porch advise,
As modes of being great and wise,
That we should cease to own or know
The luxuries that from feeling flow;
"Reason alone must claim direction,
"And Apathy's the soul's perfection.
"Like a dull lake the heart must lie;
"Nor passion's gale nor pleasure's sigh,
"Though Heaven the breeze, the breath, supplied,
"Must curl the wave or swell the tide!"

  Such was the rigid Zeno's plan
To form his philosophic man;
Such were the modes _he_ taught mankind
To weed the garden of the mind;
They tore from thence some weeds, 'tis true,
But all the flowers were ravaged too!

  Now listen to the wily strains,
Which, on Cyrene's sandy plains,
When Pleasure, nymph with loosened zone,
Usurped the philosophic throne,--
Hear what the courtly sage's[1] tongue
To his surrounding pupils sung:--
"Pleasure's the only noble end
"To which all human powers should tend,
"And Virtue gives her heavenly lore,
"But to make Pleasure please us more.
"Wisdom and she were both designed
"To make the senses more refined,
"That man might revel, free from cloying,
"Then most a sage when most enjoying!"

  Is this morality?--Oh, no!
Even I a wiser path could show.
The flower within this vase confined,
The pure, the unfading flower of mind,
Must not throw all its sweets away
Upon a mortal mould of clay;
No, no,--its richest breath should rise
In virtue's incense to the skies.

  But thus it is, all sects we see
Have watchwords of morality:
Some cry out Venus, others Jove;
Here 'tis Religion, there 'tis Love.
But while they thus so widely wander,
While mystics dream and doctors ponder:
And some, in dialectics firm,
Seek virtue in a middle term;
While thus they strive, in Heaven's defiance,
To chain morality with science;
The plain good man, whose action teach
More virtue than a sect can preach
Pursues his course, unsagely blest
His tutor whispering in his breast;
Nor could he act a purer part,
Though he had Tully all by heart.
And when he drops the tear on woe,
He little knows or cares to know
That Epictetus blamed that tear,
By Heaven approved, to virtue dear!

  Oh! when I've seen the morning beam
Floating within the dimpled stream;
While Nature, wakening from the night,
Has just put on her robes of light,
Have I, with cold optician's gaze,
Explored the _doctrine_ of those rays?
No, pedants, I have left to you
Nicely to separate hue from hue.
Go, give that moment up to art,
When Heaven and nature claim the heart;
And, dull to all their best attraction,
Go--measure _angles of refraction_.
While I, in feeling's sweet romance,
Look on each daybeam as a glance
From the great eye of Him above,
Wakening his world with looks of love!


[1] Aristippus.






THE TELL-TALE LYRE.


I've heard, there was in ancient days
  A Lyre of most melodious spell;
'Twas heaven to hear its fairy lays,
  If half be true that legends tell.

'Twas played on by the gentlest sighs,
  And to their breath it breathed again
In such entrancing melodies
  As ear had never drunk till then!

Not harmony's serenest touch
  So stilly could the notes prolong;
They were not heavenly song so much
  As they were dreams of heavenly song!

If sad the heart, whose murmuring air
  Along the chords in languor stole,
The numbers it awakened there
  Were eloquence from pity's soul.

Or if the sigh, serene and light,
  Was but the breath of fancied woes,
The string, that felt its airy flight,
  Soon whispered it to kind repose.

And when young lovers talked alone,
  If, mid their bliss, that Lyre was near,
It made their accents all its own,
  And sent forth notes that heaven might hear.

There was a nymph, who long had loved,
  But dared not tell the world how well:
The shades, where she at evening roved,
  Alone could know, alone could tell.

'Twas there, at twilight time, she stole,
  When the first star announced the night,--
With him who claimed her inmost soul,
  To wander by that soothing light.

It chanced that, in the fairy bower
  Where blest they wooed each other's smile,
This Lyre, of strange and magic power,
  Hung whispering o'er their head the while.

And as, with eyes commingling fire,
  They listened to each other's vow,
The youth full oft would make the Lyre
  A pillow for the maiden's brow!

And, while the melting words she breathed
  Were by its echoes wafted round,
Her locks had with the chords so wreathed,
  One knew not which gave forth the sound.

Alas, their hearts but little thought,
 While thus they talked the hours away,
That every sound the Lyre was taught
 Would linger long, and long betray.

So mingled with its tuneful soul
 Were all the tender murmurs grown,
That other sighs unanswered stole,
 Nor words it breathed but theirs alone.

Unhappy nymph! thy name was sung
 To every breeze that wandered by;
The secrets of thy gentle tongue
 Were breathed in song to earth and sky.

The fatal Lyre, by Envy's hand
 Hung high amid the whispering groves,
To every gale by which 'twas fanned,
 Proclaimed the mystery of your loves.

Nor long thus rudely was thy name
 To earth's derisive echoes given;
Some pitying spirit downward came.
 And took the Lyre and thee to heaven.

There, freed from earth's unholy wrongs,
 Both happy in Love's home shall be;
Thou, uttering naught but seraph songs,
 And that sweet Lyre still echoing thee!






PEACE AND GLORY.

WRITTEN ON THE APPROACH OF WAR.


Where is now the smile, that lightened
 Every hero's couch of rest?
Where is now the hope, that brightened
 Honor's eye and Pity's breast?
Have we lost the wreath we braided
 For our weary warrior men?
Is the faithless olive faded?
 Must the bay be plucked again?

Passing hour of sunny weather,
 Lovely, in your light awhile,
Peace and Glory, wed together,
 Wandered through our blessed isle.
And the eyes of Peace would glisten,
 Dewy as a morning sun,
When the timid maid would listen
 To the deeds her chief had done.

Is their hour of dalliance over?
 Must the maiden's trembling feet
Waft her from her warlike lover
 To the desert's still retreat?
Fare you well! with sighs we banish
 Nymph so fair and guests so bright;
Yet the smile, with which you vanish,
 Leaves behind a soothing light;--

Soothing light, that long shall sparkle
 O'er your warrior's sanguined way,
Through the field where horrors darkle,
 Shedding hope's consoling ray.
Long the smile his heart will cherish,
 To its absent idol true;
While around him myriads perish,
 Glory still will sigh for you!






SONG.


Take back the sigh, thy lips of art
 In passion's moment breathed to me;
Yet, no--it must not, will not part,
 'Tis now the life-breath of my heart,
And has become too pure for thee.

Take back the kiss, that faithless sigh
  With all the warmth of truth imprest;
Yet, no--the fatal kiss may lie,
Upon _thy_ lip its sweets would die,
  Or bloom to make a rival blest.

Take back the vows that, night and day,
  My heart received, I thought, from thine;
Yet, no--allow them still to stay,
They might some other heart betray,
  As sweetly as they've ruined mine.






LOVE AND REASON.


    _Quand l'homme commence  raissonner,
    il cesse de sentir_.--J. J. ROUSSEAU.


'Twas in the summer time so sweet,
  When hearts and flowers are both in season,
That--who, of all the world, should meet,
  One early dawn, but Love and Reason!

Love told his dream of yesternight,
  While Reason talked about the weather;
The morn, in sooth, was fair and bright,
  And on they took their way together.

The boy in many a gambol flew,
  While Reason, like a Juno, stalked,
And from her portly figure threw
  A lengthened shadow, as she walked.

No wonder Love, as on they past,
  Should find that sunny morning chill,
For still the shadow Reason cast
 Fell o'er the boy, and cooled him still.

In vain he tried his wings to warm.
  Or find a pathway not so dim
For still the maid's gigantic form
  Would stalk between the sun and him.

"This must not be," said little Love--
  "The sun was made for more than you."
So, turning through a myrtle grove,
  He bid the portly nymph adieu.

Now gayly roves the laughing boy
  O'er many a mead, by many a stream;
In every breeze inhaling joy,
  And drinking bliss in every beam.

From all the gardens, all the bowers,
  He culled the many sweets they shaded,
And ate the fruits and smelled the flowers,
  Till taste was gone and odor faded.

But now the sun, in pomp of noon,
  Looked blazing o'er the sultry plains;
Alas! the boy grew languid soon,
  And fever thrilled through all his veins.

The dew forsook his baby brow,
  No more with healthy bloom he smiled--
Oh! where was tranquil Reason now,
  To cast her shadow o'er the child?

Beneath a green and aged palm,
  His foot at length for shelter turning,
He saw the nymph reclining calm,
  With brow as cool as his was burning.

"Oh! take me to that bosom cold,"
  In murmurs at her feet he said;
And Reason oped her garment's fold,
  And flung it round his fevered head.

He felt her bosom's icy touch,
  And soon it lulled his pulse to rest;
For, ah! the chill was quite too much,
  And Love expired on Reason's breast!

       *       *       *       *       *

Nay, do not weep, my Fanny dear;
  While in these arms you lie.
This world hath not a wish, a fear,
That ought to cost that eye a tear.
  That heart, one single sigh.

The world!--ah, Fanny, Love must shun
  The paths where many rove;
One bosom to recline upon,
One heart to be his only--one,
  Are quite enough for Love.

What can we wish, that is not here
  Between your arms and mine?
Is there, on earth, a space so dear
As that within the happy sphere
  Two loving arms entwine?

For me, there's not a lock of jet
  Adown your temples curled,
Within whose glossy, tangling net,
My soul doth not, at once, forget
  All, all this worthless world.

'Tis in those eyes, so full of love,
  My only worlds I see;
Let but _their_ orbs in sunshine move,
And earth below and skies above
  May frown or smile for me.






ASPASIA.


'Twas in the fair Aspasia's bower,
That Love and Learning, many an hour,
In dalliance met; and Learning smiled
With pleasure on the playful child,
Who often stole, to find a nest
Within the folds of Learning's vest.

  There, as the listening statesman hung
In transport on Aspasia's tongue,
The destinies of Athens took
Their color from Aspasia's look.
Oh happy time, when laws of state
When all that ruled the country's fate,
Its glory, quiet, or alarms,
Was planned between two snow-white arms!

  Blest times! they could not always last--
And yet, even now, they _are_ not past,
Though we have lost the giant mould.
In which their men were cast of old,
Woman, dear woman, still the same,
While beauty breathes through soul or frame,
While man possesses heart or eyes,
Woman's bright empire never dies!

  No, Fanny, love, they ne'er shall say,
That beauty's charm hath past away;
Give but the universe a soul
Attuned to woman's soft control,
And Fanny hath the charm, the skill,
To wield a universe at will.






THE GRECIAN GIRL'S DREAM OF THE BLESSED ISLANDS.[1]

TO HER LOVER.


Was it the moon, or was it morning's ray,
That call'd thee, dearest, from these arms away?
Scarce hadst thou left me, when a dream of night
Came o'er my spirit so distinct and bright,
That, while I yet can vividly recall
Its witching wonders, thou shall hear them all.
Methought I saw, upon the lunar beam,
Two winged boys, such as thy muse might dream,
Descending from above, at that still hour,
And gliding, with smooth step, into my bower.
Fair as the beauteous spirits that, all day.
In Amatha's warm founts imprisoned stay,
But rise at midnight, from the enchanted rill,
To cool their plumes upon some moonlight hill.

  At once I knew their mission:--'twas to bear
My spirit upward, through the paths of air,
To that elysian realm, from whence stray beams
So oft, in sleep, had visited my dreams.
Swift at their touch dissolved the ties, that clung
All earthly round me, and aloft I sprung;
While, heavenward guides, the little genii flew
Thro' paths of light, refreshed by heaven's own dew,
And fanned by airs still fragrant with the breath
Of cloudless climes and worlds that know not death.

  Thou knowest, that, far beyond our nether sky,
And shown but dimly to man's erring eye,
A mighty ocean of blue ether rolls,[2]
Gemmed with bright islands, where the chosen souls,
Who've past in lore and love their earthly hours,
Repose for ever in unfading bowers.
That very moon, whose solitary light
So often guides thee to my bower at night,
Is no chill planet, but an isle of love,
Floating in splendor through those seas above,
And peopled with bright forms, aerial grown,
Nor knowing aught of earth but love alone.
Thither, I thought, we winged our airy way:--
Mild o'er its valleys streamed a silvery day,
While, all around, on lily beds of rest,
Reclined the spirits of the immortal Blest.
Oh! there I met those few congenial maids,
Whom love hath warmed, in philosophic shades;
There still Leontium,[3] on her sage's breast,
Found lore and love, was tutored and carest;
And there the clasp of Pythia's[4]gentle arms
Repaid the zeal which deified her charms.
The Attic Master,[5] in Aspasia's eyes,
Forgot the yoke of less endearing ties;
While fair Theano,[6] innocently fair,
Wreathed playfully her Samian's flowing hair,
Whose soul now fixt, its transmigrations past,
Found in those arms a resting-place, at last;
And smiling owned, whate'er his dreamy thought
In mystic numbers long had vainly sought,
The One that's formed of Two whom love hath bound,
Is the best number gods or men e'er found.

  But think, my Theon, with what joy I thrilled,
When near a fount, which through the valley rilled,
My fancy's eye beheld a form recline,
Of lunar race, but so resembling thine
That, oh! 'twas but fidelity in me,
To fly, to clasp, and worship it for thee.
No aid of words the unbodied soul requires,
To waft a wish or embassy desires;
But by a power, to spirits only given,
A deep, mute impulse, only felt in heaven,
Swifter than meteor shaft through summer skies,
From soul to soul the glanced idea flies.

  Oh, my beloved, how divinely sweet
Is the pure joy, when kindred spirits meet!
Like him, the river-god,[7]whose waters flow,
With love their only light, through caves below,
Wafting in triumph all the flowery braids,
And festal rings, with which Olympic maids
Have decked his current, as an offering meet
To lay at Arethusa's shining feet.

Think, when he meets at last his fountain-bride,
What perfect love must thrill the blended tide!
Each lost in each, till, mingling into one,
Their lot the same for shadow or for sun,
A type of true love, to the deep they run.
'Twas thus--
  But, Theon, 'tis an endless theme,
And thou growest weary of my half-told dream.

Oh would, my love, we were together now.
And I would woo sweet patience to thy brow,
And make thee smile at all the magic tales
Of starlight bowers and planetary vales,
Which my fond soul, inspired by thee and love,
In slumber's loom hath fancifully wove.
But no; no more--soon as tomorrow's ray
O'er soft Ilissus shall have died away,
I'll come, and, while love's planet in the west
Shines o'er our meeting, tell thee all the rest.


[1] It was imagined by some of the ancients that there is an
ethereal ocean above us, and that the sun and moon are two floating,
luminous islands, in which the spirits of the blest reside.

[2] This belief of an ocean in the heavens, or "waters above the
firmament," was one of the many physical errors In which the early fathers
bewildered themselves.

[3] The pupil and mistress of Epicurus, who called her his "dear
little Leontium" as appears by a fragment of one of his letters in
Laertius. This Leontium was a woman of talent; "she had the impudence
(says Cicero) to write against Theophrastus;" and Cicero, at the same
time, gives her a name which is neither polite nor translatable.

[4] Pythia was a woman whom Aristotle loved, and to whom after
her death he paid divine honors, solemnizing her memory by the same
sacrifices which the Athenians offered to the Goddess Ceres.

[5] Socrates, who used to console himself in the society of
Aspasia for those "less endearing ties" which he found at home with
Xantippe.

[6] There are some sensible letters extant under the name of
this fair Pythagorean. They are addressed to her female friends upon the
education of children, the treatment of servants, etc.

[7] The river Alpheus, which flowed by Pisa or Olympia, and into
which it was customary to throw offerings of different kinds, during the
celebration of the Olympic games. In the pretty romance of Clitophon and
Leucippe, the river is supposed to carry these offerings as bridal gifts
to the fountain Arethusa.






TO CLOE.

IMITATED FROM MARTIAL.


I could resign that eye of blue.
  How e'er its splendor used to thrill me;
And even that cheek of roseate hue,--
  To lose it, Cloe, scarce would kill me.

That snowy neck I ne'er should miss,
  However much I've raved about it;
And sweetly as that lip can kiss,
  I _think_ I could exist without it.

In short, so well I've learned to fast,
  That, sooth my love, I know not whether
I might not bring myself at last,
  To--do without you altogether.






THE WREATH AND THE CHAIN.


I bring thee, love, a golden chain,
  I bring thee too a flowery wreath;
The gold shall never wear a stain,
  The flowerets long shall sweetly breathe.
Come, tell me which the tie shall be,
To bind thy gentle heart to me.

The Chain is formed of golden threads,
  Bright as Minerva's yellow hair,
When the last beam of evening sheds
  Its calm and sober lustre there.
The Wreath's of brightest myrtle wove,
  With sunlit drops of bliss among it,
And many a rose-leaf, culled by Love,
  To heal his lip when bees have stung it.
Come, tell me which the tie shall be,
To bind thy gentle heart to me.

Yes, yes, I read that ready eye,
  Which answers when the tongue is loath,
Thou likest the form of either tie,
  And spreadest thy playful hands for both.
Ah!--if there were not something wrong,
  The world would see them blended oft;
The Chain would make the Wreath so strong!
  The Wreath would make the Chain so soft!
Then might the gold, the flowerets be
Sweet fetters for my love and me.

But, Fanny, so unblest they twine,
  That (heaven alone can tell the reason)
When mingled thus they cease to shine,
  Or shine but for a transient season.
Whether the Chain may press too much,
  Or that the Wreath is slightly braided,
Let but the gold the flowerets touch,
  And all their bloom, their glow is faded!
Oh! better to be always free.
Than thus to bind my love to me.

       *       *       *       *       *

The timid girl now hung her head,
  And, as she turned an upward glance,
I saw a doubt its twilight spread
  Across her brow's divine expanse
Just then, the garland's brightest rose
  Gave one of its love-breathing sighs--
Oh! who can ask how Fanny chose,
  That ever looked in Fanny's eyes!
"The Wreath, my life, the Wreath shall be
"The tie to bind my soul to thee."






TO .... ....


And hast thou marked the pensive shade,
  That many a time obscures my brow,
Midst all the joys, beloved maid.
  Which thou canst give, and only thou?

Oh! 'tis not that I then forget
  The bright looks that before me shine;
For never throbbed a bosom yet
  Could feel their witchery, like mine.

When bashful on my bosom hid,
  And blushing to have felt so blest,
Thou dost but lift thy languid lid
  Again to close it on my breast;--

Yes,--these are minutes all thine own,
  Thine own to give, and mine to feel;
Yet even in them, my heart has known
  The sigh to rise, the tear to steal.

For I have thought of former hours,
  When he who first thy soul possest,
Like me awaked its witching powers,
  Like me was loved, like me was blest.

Upon _his_ name thy murmuring tongue
  Perhaps hath all as sweetly dwelt;
Upon his words thine ear hath hung,
  With transport all as purely felt.

For him--yet why the past recall,
  To damp and wither present bliss?
Thou'rt now my own, heart, spirit, all,
  And heaven could grant no more than this!

Forgive me, dearest, oh! forgive;
  I would be first, be sole to thee,
Thou shouldst have but begun to live,
  The hour that gave thy heart to me.

Thy book of life till then effaced,
  Love should have kept that leaf alone
On which he first so brightly traced
  That thou wert, soul and all, my own.






TO .......'S PICTURE.


Go then, if she, whose shade thou art,
  No more will let thee soothe my pain;
Yet, tell her, it has cost this heart
  Some pangs, to give thee back again.

Tell her, the smile was not so dear,
  With which she made the semblance mine,
As bitter is the burning tear,
  With which I now the gift resign.

Yet go--and could she still restore,
  As some exchange for taking thee.
The tranquil look which first I wore,
  When her eyes found me calm and free;

Could she give back the careless flow,
  The spirit that my heart then knew--
Yet, no, 'tis vain--go, picture, go--
  Smile at me once, and then--adieu!






FRAGMENT OF A MYTHOLOGICAL HYMN TO LOVE.[1]


    Blest infant of eternity!
  Before the day-star learned to move,
In pomp of fire, along his grand career,
  Glancing the beamy shafts of light

From his rich quiver to the farthest sphere,
    Thou wert alone, oh Love!
  Nestling beneath the wings of ancient Night,
  Whose horrors seemed to smile in shadowing thee.
No form of beauty soothed thine eye,
  As through the dim expanse it wandered wide;
No kindred spirit caught thy sigh,
  As o'er the watery waste it lingering died.

Unfelt the pulse, unknown the power,
  That latent in his heart was sleeping,--
Oh Sympathy! that lonely hour
  Saw Love himself thy absence weeping.

But look, what glory through the darkness beams!
Celestial airs along the water glide:--
What Spirit art thou, moving o'er the tide
  So beautiful? oh, not of earth,
  But, in that glowing hour, the birth
Of the young Godhead's own creative dreams.
      'Tis she!
Psyche, the firstborn spirit of the air.
    To thee, oh Love, she turns,

    On thee her eyebeam burns:
  Blest hour, before all worlds ordained to be!
      They meet--
  The blooming god--the spirit fair
    Meet in communion sweet.
  Now, Sympathy, the hour is thine;
  All Nature feels the thrill divine,
  The veil of Chaos is withdrawn,
And their first kiss is great Creation's dawn!


[1] Love and Psyche are here considered as the active and passive
principles of creation, and the universe is supposed to have received its
first harmonizing impulse from the nuptial sympathy between these two
powers. A marriage is generally the first step in cosmogony. Timaeus held
Form to be the father, and Matter the mother of the World.






TO HIS SERENE HIGHNESS THE DUKE OF MONTPENSIER
ON HIS PORTRAIT OF THE LADY ADELAIDE FORBES.

_Donington Park, 1802_


To catch the thought, by painting's spell,
  Howe'er remote, howe'er refined,
And o'er the kindling canvas tell
  The silent story of the mind;

O'er nature's form to glance the eye,
  And fix, by mimic light and shade,
Her morning tinges ere they fly,
  Her evening blushes, ere they fade;

Yes, these are Painting's proudest powers,
  The gift, by which her art divine
Above all others proudly towers,--
  And these, oh Prince! are richly thine.

And yet, when Friendship sees thee trace,
  In almost living truth exprest,
This bright memorial of a face
  On which her eye delights to rest;

While o'er the lovely look serene,
  The smile of peace, the bloom of youth,
The cheek, that blushes to be seen.
  The eye that tells the bosom's truth;

While o'er each line, so brightly true,
  Our eyes with lingering pleasure rove,
Blessing the touch whose various hue
  Thus brings to mind the form we love;

We feel the magic of thy art,
  And own it with a zest, a zeal,
A pleasure, nearer to the heart
  Than critic taste can _ever_ feel.






THE FALL OF HEBE.

A DITHYRAMBIC ODE.


      'Twas on a day
When the immortals at their banquet lay;
      The bowl
  Sparkled with starry dew,
The weeping of those myriad urns of light,
  Within whose orbs, the Almighty Power,
  At nature's dawning hour,
Stored the rich fluid of ethereal soul.
      Around,
Soft odorous clouds, that upward wing their flight
      From eastern isles
(Where they have bathed them in the orient ray,
And with rich fragrance all their bosoms filled).
In circles flew, and, melting as they flew,
A liquid daybreak o'er the board distilled.

      All, all was luxury!
  All _must_ be luxury, where Lyaeus smiles.
    His locks divine
      Were crowned
    With a bright meteor-braid,
Which, like an ever-springing wreath of vine,
  Shot into brilliant leafy shapes,
And o'er his brow in lambent tendrils played:
    While mid the foliage hung,
      Like lucid grapes,
A thousand clustering buds of light,
Culled from the garden of the galaxy.

Upon his bosom Cytherea's head
Lay lovely, as when first the Syrens sung
      Her beauty's dawn,
And all the curtains of the deep, undrawn,
Revealed her sleeping in its azure bed.
      The captive deity
    Hung lingering on her eyes and lip,
      With looks of ecstasy.
      Now, on his arm,
    In blushes she reposed,
  And, while he gazed on each bright charm,
To shade his burning eyes her hand in dalliance stole.

And now she raised her rosy mouth to sip
    The nectared wave
    Lyaeus gave,
And from her eyelids, half-way closed,
  Sent forth a melting gleam,
  Which fell like sun-dew in the bowl:
While her bright hair, in mazy flow
  Of gold descending
Adown her cheek's luxurious glow,
  Hung o'er the goblet's side,
And was reflected in its crystal tide,
  Like a bright crocus flower,
 Whose sunny leaves, at evening hour
  With roses of Cyrene blending,[1]
Hang o'er the mirror of some silvery stream.

      The Olympian cup
      Shone in the hands
  Of dimpled Hebe, as she winged her feet
        Up
      The empyreal mount,
To drain the soul-drops at their stellar fount;[2]
        And still
      As the resplendent rill
  Gushed forth into the cup with mantling heat,
    Her watchful care
  Was still to cool its liquid fire
With snow-white sprinklings of that feathery air
The children of the Pole respire,
  In those enchanted lands.[3]
Where life is all a spring, and
  north winds never blow.

      But oh!
    Bright Hebe, what a tear,
    And what a blush were thine,
  When, as the breath of every Grace
Wafted thy feet along the studded sphere,
  With a bright cup for Jove himself to drink,
  Some star, that shone beneath thy tread,
    Raising its amorous head
  To kiss those matchless feet,
    Checked thy career too fleet,
    And all heaven's host of eyes
  Entranced, but fearful all,
Saw thee, sweet Hebe, prostrate fall
  Upon the bright floor of the azure skies;
    Where, mid its stars, thy beauty lay,
    As blossom, shaken from the spray
      Of a spring thorn,
Lies mid the liquid sparkles of the morn.
Or, as in temples of the Paphian shade,
The worshippers of Beauty's queen behold
An image of their rosy idol, laid
  Upon a diamond shrine.

    The wanton wind,
  Which had pursued the flying fair,
  And sported mid the tresses unconfined
    Of her bright hair,
Now, as she fell,--oh wanton breeze!
Ruffled the robe, whose graceful flow
Hung o'er those limbs of unsunned snow,
  Purely as the Eleusinian veil
    Hangs o'er the Mysteries!

  The brow of Juno flushed--
  Love blest the breeze!
  The Muses blushed;
And every cheek was hid behind a lyre,
While every eye looked laughing through the strings.
But the bright cup? the nectared draught
Which Jove himself was to have quaffed?
  Alas, alas, upturned it lay
  By the fallen Hebe's side;
While, in slow lingering drops, the ethereal tide,
As conscious of its own rich essence, ebbed away.

Who was the Spirit that remembered Man,
      In that blest hour,
    And, with a wing of love,
  Brushed off the goblet's scattered tears,
As, trembling near the edge of heaven they ran,
And sent them floating to our orb below?
  Essence of immortality!
    The shower
  Fell glowing through the spheres;
While all around new tints of bliss,
    New odors and new light,
    Enriched its radiant flow.
      Now, with a liquid kiss,
  It stole along the thrilling wire
    Of Heaven's luminous Lyre,
  Stealing the soul of music in its flight:
  And now, amid the breezes bland,
That whisper from the planets as they roll,
  The bright libation, softly fanned
  By all their sighs, meandering stole.
    They who, from Atlas' height,
      Beheld this rosy flame
  Descending through the waste of night,
Thought 'twas some planet, whose empyreal frame
  Had kindled, as it rapidly revolved
Around its fervid axle, and dissolved
    Into a flood so bright!

      The youthful Day,
    Within his twilight bower,
    Lay sweetly sleeping
On the flushed bosom of a lotos-flower;[4]
  When round him, in profusion weeping,
    Dropt the celestial shower,
        Steeping
    The rosy clouds, that curled
      About his infant head,
Like myrrh upon the locks of Cupid shed.
    But, when the waking boy
Waved his exhaling tresses through the sky,
        O morn of joy!
        The tide divine,
  All glorious with the vermil dye
  It drank beneath his orient eye,
  Distilled, in dews, upon the world,
And every drop was wine, was heavenly WINE!
  Blest be the sod, and blest the flower
  On which descended first that shower,
All fresh from Jove's nectareous springs;--
  Oh far less sweet the flower, the sod,
  O'er which the Spirit of the Rainbow flings
  The magic mantle of her solar God![5]


[1] We learn from Theopbrastus, that the roses of Cyrene were particularly
fragrant.

[2] Heraclitus (Physicus) held the soul to be a spark of the stellar
essence.

[3] The country of the Hyperboreans. These people were supposed to be
placed so far north that the north wind could not affect them; they lived
longer than any other mortals; passed their whole time in music and
dancing, etc.

[4] The Egyptians represented the dawn of day by a young boy seated upon a
lotos. Observing that the lotos showed its head above water at sunrise,
and sank again at his setting, they conceived the idea of consecrating
this flower to Osiris, or the sun.

[5] The ancients esteemed those flowers and trees the sweetest upon which
the rainbow had appeared to rest; and the wood they chiefly burned in
sacrifices, was that which the smile of Iris had consecrated.






RINGS AND SEALS.


"Go!" said the angry, weeping maid,
"The charm is broken!--once betrayed,
"Never can this wronged heart rely
"On word or look, on oath or sigh.
"Take back the gifts, so fondly given,
"With promised faith and vows to heaven;
"That little ring which, night and morn,
"With wedded truth my hand hath worn;
"That seal which oft, in moments blest,
"Thou hast upon my lip imprest,
"And sworn its sacred spring should be
"A fountain sealed[1] for only thee:
"Take, take them back, the gift and vow,
"All sullied, lost and hateful now!"

  I took the ring--the seal I took,
While, oh, her every tear and look
Were such as angels look and shed,
When man is by the world misled.
Gently I whispered, "Fanny, dear!
"Not half thy lover's gifts are here:
"Say, where are all the kisses given,
"From morn to noon, from noon to even,--
"Those signets of true love, worth more
"Than Solomon's own seal of yore,--
"Where are those gifts, so sweet, so many?
"Come, dearest,--give back all, if any."
  While thus I whispered, trembling too,
Lest all the nymph had sworn was true,
I saw a smile relenting rise
Mid the moist azure of her eyes,
Like daylight o'er a sea of blue,
While yet in mid-air hangs the dew
She let her cheek repose on mine,
She let my arms around her twine;
One kiss was half allowed, and then--
The ring and seal were hers again.


[1] "There are gardens, supposed to be those of King Solomon, in the
neighborhood of Bethlehem. The friars show a fountain, which, they say, is
the sealed fountain, to which the holy spouse in the Canticles is
compared; and they pretend a tradition, that Solomon shut up these springs
and put his signet upon the door, to keep them for his own
drinking."--_Maundrell's Travels_.






TO MISS SUSAN BECKFORD.[1]

ON HER SINGING.


I more than once have heard at night
  A song like those thy lip hath given,
And it was sung by shapes of light,
  Who looked and breathed, like thee, of heaven.

But this was all a dream of sleep.
  And I have said when morning shone:--
"Why should the night-witch, Fancy, keep
  "These wonders for herself alone?"

I knew not then that fate had lent
  Such tones to one of mortal birth;
I knew not then that Heaven had sent
  A voice, a form like thine on earth.

And yet, in all that flowery maze
  Through which my path of life has led,
When I have heard the sweetest lays
  From lips of rosiest lustre shed;

When I have felt the warbled word
  From Beauty's lip, in sweetness vying
With music's own melodious bird;
  When on the rose's bosom lying

Though form and song at once combined
  Their loveliest bloom and softest thrill,
My heart hath sighed, my ear hath pined
  For something lovelier, softer still:--

Oh, I have found it all, at last,
  In thee, thou sweetest living lyre,
Through which the soul of song e'er past,
  Or feeling breathed its sacred fire.

All that I e'er, in wildest flight
  Of fancy's dreams could hear or see
Of music's sigh or beauty's light
  Is realized, at once, in thee!


[1] Afterward Duchess of Hamilton.






IMPROMPTU,

ON LEAVING SOME FRIENDS.


    _o dulces comitum valete coetus_!
    CATULLUS.


No, never shall my soul forget
  The friends I found so cordial-hearted;
Dear shall be the day we met,
  And dear shall be the night we parted.

If fond regrets, however sweet,
  Must with the lapse of time decay,
Yet stall, when thus in mirth you meet,
  Fill high to him that's far away!

Long be the light of memory found
  Alive within your social glass;
Let that be still the magic round.
  O'er which Oblivion, dare not pass.






A WARNING.

TO .......


Oh, fair as heaven and chaste as light!
Did nature mould thee all so bright.
That thou shouldst e'er be brought to weep
O'er languid virtue's fatal sleep,
O'er shame extinguished, honor fled,
Peace lost, heart withered, feeling dead?

No, no! a star was born with thee,
Which sheds eternal purity.
Thou hast, within those sainted eyes,
So fair a transcript of the skies,
In lines of light such heavenly lore
That men should read them and adore.
Yet have I known a gentle maid
Whose mind and form were both arrayed
In nature's purest light, like thine;--
Who wore that clear, celestial sign
Which seems to mark the brow that's fair
For destiny's peculiar care;
Whose bosom, too, like Dian's own,
Was guarded by a sacred zone,
Where the bright gem of virtue shone;
Whose eyes had in their light a charm
Against all wrong and guile and harm.
Yet, hapless maid, in one sad hour
These spells have lost their guardian power;
The gem has been beguiled away;
Her eyes have lost their chastening ray;
The modest pride, the guiltless shame,
The smiles that from reflection came,
All, all have fled and left her mind
A faded monument behind;
The ruins of a once pure shrine,
No longer fit for guest divine,
Oh! 'twas a sight I wept to see--
Heaven keep the lost one's fate from thee!






TO .......


'Tis time, I feel, to leave thee now,
  While yet my soul is something free;
While yet those dangerous eyes allow
  One minute's thought to stray from thee.

Oh! thou becom'st each moment dearer;
  Every chance that brings me nigh thee
Brings my ruin nearer, nearer,--
  I am lost, unless I fly thee.

Nay, if thou dost not scorn and hate me,
  Doom me not thus so soon to fall
Duties, fame, and hopes await me,--
  But that eye would blast them all!

For, thou hast heart as false and cold
  As ever yet allured and swayed,
And couldst, without a sigh, behold
  The ruin which thyself had made.

Yet,--_could_ I think that, truly fond,
  That eye but once would smile on me,
Even as thou art, how far beyond
  Fame, duty, wealth, that smile would be!

Oh! but to win it, night and day,
  Inglorious at thy feet reclined,
I'd sigh my dreams of fame away,
  The world for thee forgot, resigned.

But no, 'tis o'er, and--thus we part,
  Never to meet again--no, never,
False woman, what a mind and heart
 Thy treachery has undone forever.






WOMAN.


Away, away--you're all the same,
  A smiling, fluttering, jilting throng;
And, wise too late, I burn with shame,
  To think I've been your slave so long.

Slow to be won, and quick to rove,
  From folly kind, from cunning loath,
Too cold for bliss, too weak for love,
  Yet feigning all that's best in both;

Still panting o'er a crowd to reign,--
  More joy it gives to woman's breast
To make ten frigid coxcombs vain,
  Than one true, manly lover blest.

Away, away--your smile's a curse--
  Oh! blot me from the race of men,
Kind, pitying Heaven, by death or worse,
  If e'er I love such things again.






TO .......


Come, take thy harp--'tis vain to muse
  Upon the gathering ills we see;
Oh! take thy harp and let me lose
  All thoughts of ill in hearing thee.

Sing to me, love!--Though death were near,
  Thy song could make my soul forget--
Nay, nay, in pity, dry that tear,
  All may be well, be happy yet.

Let me but see that snowy arm
  Once more upon the dear harp lie,
And I will cease to dream of harm,
  Will smile at fate, while thou art nigh.

Give me that strain of mournful touch
  We used to love long, long ago,
Before our hearts had known as much
  As now, alas! they bleed to know.

Sweet notes! they tell of former peace,
  Of all that looked so smiling then,
Now vanished, lost--oh, pray thee cease,
  I cannot bear those sounds again.

Art _thou_, too, wretched? Yes, thou art;
  I see thy tears flow fast with mine--
Come, come to this devoted heart,
  'Tis breaking, but it still is thine!






A VISION OF PHILOSOPHY.


'Twas on the Red Sea coast, at morn, we met
The venerable man;[1] a healthy bloom
Mingled its softness with the vigorous thought
That towered upon his brow; and when he spoke
'Twas language sweetened into song--such holy sounds
As oft, they say, the wise and virtuous hear,
Prelusive to the harmony of heaven,
When death is nigh; and still, as he unclosed[2]
His sacred lips, an odor, all as bland
As ocean-breezes gather from the flowers
That blossom in Elysium, breathed around,
With silent awe we listened, while he told
Of the dark veil which many an age had hung
O'er Nature's form, till, long explored by man,
The mystic shroud grew thin and luminous,
And glimpses of that heavenly form shone through:--
Of magic wonders, that were known and taught
By him (or Cham or Zoroaster named)
Who mused amid the mighty cataclysm,
O'er his rude tablets of primeval lore;
And gathering round him, in the sacred ark,
The mighty secrets of that former globe,
Let not the living star of science sink
Beneath the waters, which ingulfed a world!--
Of visions, by Calliope revealed
To him,[3]who traced upon his typic lyre
The diapason of man's mingled frame,
And the grand Doric heptachord of heaven.
With all of pure, of wondrous and arcane,
Which the grave sons of Mochus, many a night,
Told to the young and bright-haired visitant
Of Carmel's sacred mount.--Then, in a flow
Of calmer converse, he beguiled us on
Through many a Maze of Garden and of Porch,
Through many a system, where the scattered light
Of heavenly truth lay, like a broken beam
From the pure sun, which, though refracted all
Into a thousand hues, is sunshine still,[4]
And bright through every change!--he spoke of Him,
The lone, eternal One, who dwells above,
And of the soul's untraceable descent
From that high fount of spirit, through the grades
Of intellectual being, till it mix
With atoms vague, corruptible, and dark;
Nor yet even then, though sunk in earthly dross,
Corrupted all, nor its ethereal touch
Quite lost, but tasting of the fountain still.
As some bright river, which has rolled along
Through meads of flowery light and mines of gold,
When poured at length into the dusky deep,
Disdains to take at once its briny taint,
Or balmy freshness, of the scenes it left.
But keeps unchanged awhile the lustrous tinge,
And here the old man ceased--a winged train
Of nymphs and genii bore him from our eyes.
The fair illusion fled! and, as I waked,
'Twas clear that my rapt soul had roamed, the while,
To that bright realm of dreams, that spirit-world,
Which mortals know by its long track of light
O'er midnight's sky, and call the Galaxy.[5]


[1] In Plutarch's Essay on the Decline of the Oracles, Cleombrotus, one of
the interlocutors, describes an extraordinary man whom he had met with,
after long research, upon the banks of the Red Sea. Once in every year
this supernatural personage appeared to mortals and conversed with them;
the rest of his time he passed among the Genii and the Nymphs.

[2] The celebrated Janus Dousa, a little before his death, imagined that
he heard a strain of music in the air.

[3] Orpheus.--Paulinus, in his "_Hebdomades_, cap. 2, _lib_. iii, has
endeavored to show, after the Platonists, that man is a diapason, or
octave, made up of a diatesseron, which is his soul, and a dispente, which
is his body. Those frequent allusions to music, by which the ancient
philosophers illustrated their sublime theories, must have tended very
much to elevate the character of the art, and to enrich it with
associations of the grandest and most interesting nature.

[4] Lactantius asserts that all the truths of Christianity may be found
dispersed through the ancient philosophical sects, and that any one who
would collect these scattered fragments of orthodoxy might form a code in
no respect differing from that of the Christian.

[5] According to Pythagoras, the people of Dreams are souls collected
together in the Galaxy.






TO MRS. .......


To see thee every day that came,
And find thee still each day the same;
In pleasure's smile or sorrow's tear
To me still ever kind and dear;--
To meet thee early, leave thee late,
Has been so long my bliss, my fate,
That life, without this cheering ray,
Which came, like sunshine, every day,
And all my pain, my sorrow chased,
Is now a lone, a loveless waste.

Where are the chords she used to touch?
The airs, the songs she loved so much?
Those songs are hushed, those chords are still,
And so, perhaps, will every thrill
Of feeling soon be lulled to rest,
Which late I waked in Anna's breast.
Yet, no--the simple notes I played
From memory's tablet soon may fade;
The songs, which Anna loved to hear,
May vanish from her heart and ear;
But friendship's voice shall ever find
An echo in that gentle mind,
Nor memory lose nor time impair
The sympathies that tremble there.






TO LADY HEATHCOTE,

ON AN OLD RING FOUND AT TUNBRIDGE-WELLS.


    _"Tunnebridge est  la mme distance de Londres, que Fontainebleau
    l'est de Paris. Ce qu'il y a de beau et de galant dans l'un et dans
    l'autre sexe s'y rassemble au terns des eaux. La compagnie,"_ etc.
    --See _Memoires de Grammont_, Second Part, chap. iii.


_Tunbridge Wells_.


When Grammont graced these happy springs,
  And Tunbridge saw, upon her Pantiles,
The merriest wight of all the kings
  That ever ruled these gay, gallant isles;

Like us, by day, they rode, they walked,
  At eve they did as we may do,
And Grammont just like Spencer talked,
  And lovely Stewart smiled like you.

The only different trait is this,
  That woman then, if man beset her,
Was rather given to saying "yes,"
  Because,--as yet, she knew no better.

Each night they held a coterie,
  Where, every fear to slumber charmed,
Lovers were all they ought to be,
  And husbands not the least alarmed.

Then called they up their school-day pranks,
  Nor thought it much their sense beneath
To play at riddles, quips, and cranks,
  And lords showed wit, and ladies teeth.

As--"Why are husbands like the mint?"
  Because, forsooth, a husband's duty
Is but to set the name and print
  That give a currency to beauty.

"Why is a rose in nettles hid
  Like a young widow, fresh and fair?"
Because 'tis sighing to be rid
  Of weeds, that "have no business there!"

And thus they missed and thus they hit,
  And now they struck and now they parried;
And some lay in of full grown wit.
  While others of a pun miscarried,

'Twas one of those facetious nights
  That Grammont gave this forfeit ring
For breaking grave conundrumrites,
  Or punning ill, or--some such thing;--

From whence it can be fairly traced,
  Through many a branch and many a bough,
From twig to twig, until it graced
  The snowy hand that wears it now.

All this I'll prove, and then, to you
  Oh Tunbridge! and your springs ironical,
I swear by Heathcote's eye of blue
  To dedicate the important chronicle.

Long may your ancient inmates give
  Their mantles to your modern lodgers,
And Charles's loves in Heathcote live,
  And Charles's bards revive in Rogers.

Let no pedantic fools be there;
  For ever be those fops abolished,
With heads as wooden as thy ware,
  And, heaven knows! not half so polished.

But still receive the young, the gay.
  The few who know the rare delight
Of reading Grammont every day,
  And acting Grammont every night.






THE DEVIL AMONG THE SCHOLARS,

A FRAGMENT.

       *       *       *       *       *

But, whither have these gentle ones,
These rosy nymphs and black-eyed nuns,
With all of Cupid's wild romancing,
Led by truant brains a-dancing?
Instead of studying tomes scholastic,
Ecclesiastic, or monastic,
Off I fly, careering far
In chase of Pollys, prettier far
Than any of their namesakes are,--
The Polymaths and Polyhistors,
Polyglots and all their sisters.

So have I known a hopeful youth
Sit down in quest of lore and truth,
With tomes sufficient to confound him,
Like Tohu Bohu, heapt around him,--
Mamurra[1] stuck to Theophrastus,
And Galen tumbling o'er Bombastus.[2]
When lo! while all that's learned and wise
Absorbs the boy, he lifts his eyes,
And through the window of his study
Beholds some damsel fair and ruddy,
With eyes, as brightly turned upon him as
The angel's[3] were on Hieronymus.
Quick fly the folios, widely scattered,
Old Homer's laureled brow is battered,
And Sappho, headlong sent, flies just in
The reverend eye of St. Augustin.
Raptured he quits each dozing sage,
Oh woman, for thy lovelier page:
Sweet book!--unlike the books of art,--
Whose errors are thy fairest part;
In whom the dear errata column
Is the best page in all the volume![4]
But to begin my subject rhyme--
'Twas just about this devilish time,
When scarce there happened any frolics
That were not done by Diabolics,
A cold and loveless son of Lucifer,
Who woman scorned, nor saw the use of her,
A branch of Dagon's family,
(Which Dagon, whether He or She,
Is a dispute that vastly better is
Referred to Scaliger[5] _et coeteris_,)
Finding that, in this cage of fools,
The wisest sots adorn the schools,
Took it at once his head Satanic in,
To grow a great scholastic manikin,--
A doctor, quite as learned and fine as
Scotus John or Tom Aquinas,
Lully, Hales Irrefragabilis,
Or any doctor of the rabble is.
In languages, the Polyglots,
Compared to him, were Babelsots:
He chattered more than ever Jew did;--
Sanhedrim and Priest included,
Priest and holy Sanhedrim
Were one-and-seventy fools to him.
But chief the learned demon felt a
Zeal so strong for gamma, delta,
That, all for Greek and learning's glory,[6]
He nightly tippled "Graeco more,"
And never paid a bill or balance
Except upon the Grecian Kalends:--
From whence your scholars, when they want tick,
Say, to be Attic's to be _on_ tick.
In logics, he was quite Ho Panu;
Knew as much as ever man knew.
He fought the combat syllogistic
With so much skill and art eristic,
That though you were the learned Stagyrite,
At once upon the hip he had you right.
In music, though he had no ears
Except for that amongst the spheres,
(Which most of all, as he averred it,
He dearly loved, 'cause no one heard it,)
Yet aptly he, at sight, could read
Each tuneful diagram in Bede,
And find, by Euclid's corollaria,
The ratios of a jig or aria.
But, as for all your warbling Delias,
Orpheuses and Saint Cecilias,
He owned he thought them much surpast
By that redoubted Hyaloclast[7]
Who still contrived by dint of throttle,
Where'er he went to crack a bottle.

  Likewise to show his mighty knowledge, he,
On things unknown in physiology,
Wrote many a chapter to divert us,
(Like that great little man Albertus,)
Wherein he showed the reason why,
When children first are heard to cry,
If boy the baby chance to be.
He cries O A!--if girl, O E!--
Which are, quoth he, exceeding fair hints
Respecting their first sinful parents;
"Oh Eve!" exclaimeth little madam,
While little master cries "Oh Adam!"

  But, 'twas in Optics and Dioptrics,
Our daemon played his first and top tricks.
He held that sunshine passes quicker
Through wine than any other liquor;
And though he saw no great objection
To steady light and clear reflection,
He thought the aberrating rays,
Which play about a bumper's blaze,
Were by the Doctors looked, in common, on,
As a more rare and rich phenomenon.
He wisely said that the sensorium
Is for the eyes a great emporium,
To which these noted picture-stealers
Send all they can and meet with dealers.
In many an optical proceeding
The brain, he said, showed great good breeding;
For instance, when we ogle women
(A trick which Barbara tutored him in),
Although the dears are apt to get in a
Strange position on the retina,
Yet instantly the modest brain
Doth set them on their legs again!

  Our doctor thus, with "stuft sufficiency"
Of all omnigenous omnisciency,
Began (as who would not begin
That had, like him, so much within?)
To let it out in books of all sorts,
Folios, quartos, large and small sorts;
Poems, so very deep and sensible
That they were quite incomprehensible
Prose, which had been at learning's Fair,
And bought up all the trumpery there,
The tattered rags of every vest,
In which the Greeks and Romans drest,
And o'er her figure swollen and antic
Scattered them all with airs so frantic,
That those, who saw what fits she had,
Declared unhappy Prose was mad!
Epics he wrote and scores of rebuses,
All as neat as old Turnebus's;
Eggs and altars, cyclopaedias,
Grammars, prayer-books--oh! 'twere tedious,
Did I but tell thee half, to follow me:
Not the scribbling bard of Ptolemy,
No--nor the hoary Trismegistus,
(Whose writings all, thank heaven! have missed us,)
E'er filled with lumber such a wareroom
As this great "_porcus literarum_!"


[1] Mamurra, a dogmatic philosopher, who never doubted about
anything, except who was his father.

[2] Bombastus was one of the names of that great scholar and
quack Paracelsus. He used to fight the devil every night with a
broadsword, to the no small terror of his pupil Oporinus, who has recorded
the circumstance.

[3]  The angel, who scolded St. Jerome for reading Cicero, as
Gratian tells the story in his "_concordantia discordantium Canonum_," and
says, that for this reason bishops were not allowed to read the Classics.

[4] The idea of the Rabbins, respecting the origin of woman, is
not a little singular. They think that man was originally formed with a
tail, like a monkey, but that the Deity cut off this appendage, and made
woman of it.

[5] Scaliger.--Dagon was thought by others to be a certain
sea-monster, who came every day out of the Red Sea to teach the Syrians
husbandry.

[6] It is much to be regretted that Martin Luther, with all his
talents for reforming, should yet be vulgar enough to laugh at Camerarius
for writing to him in Greek, "Master Joachim (says he) has sent me some
dates and some raisins, and has also written me two letters in Greek. As
soon as I am recovered, I shall answer them in Turkish, that he too may
have the pleasure of reading what he does not understand."

[7] Or Glass-breaker--Morhofius has given an account of this
extraordinary man, in a work, published 1682.

       *       *       *       *       *








POEMS RELATING TO AMERICA




TO FRANCIS, EARL OF MOIRA.

GENERAL IN HIS MAJESTY'S FORCES, MASTER-GENERAL OF THE ORDNANCE,
CONSTABLE OF THE TOWER, ETC.

MY LORD,


It is impossible to think of addressing a Dedication to your Lordship
without calling to mind the well-known reply of the Spartan to a
rhetorician, who proposed to pronounce an eulogium on Hercules. "Oh
Hercules!" said the honest Spartan, "who ever thought of blaming
Hercules?" In a similar manner the concurrence of public opinion has left
to the panegyrist of your Lordship a very superfluous task. I shall,
therefore, be silent on the subject, and merely entreat your indulgence to
the very humble tribute of gratitude which I have here the honor to
present.

I am, my Lord,
With every feeling of attachment and respect,
Your Lordship's very devoted Servant,

THOMAS MOORE.

_37 Bury Street, St. James's,
April 10, 1806_.




PREFACE.[1]


The principal poems in the following collection were written during an
absence of fourteen months from Europe. Though curiosity was certainly not
the motive of my voyage to America, yet it happened that the gratification
of curiosity was the only advantage which I derived from it. Finding
myself in the country of a new people, whose infancy had promised so much,
and whose progress to maturity has been an object of such interesting
speculation, I determined to employ the short period of time, which my
plan of return to Europe afforded me, in travelling through a few of the
States, and acquiring some knowledge of the inhabitants.

The impression which my mind received from the character and manners of
these republicans, suggested the Epistles which are written from the city
of Washington and Lake Erie.[2] How far I was right in thus assuming the
tone of a satirist against a people whom I viewed but as a stranger and a
visitor, is a doubt which my feelings did not allow me time to
investigate. All I presume to answer for is the fidelity of the picture
which I have given; and though prudence might have dictated gentler
language, truth, I think, would have justified severer.

I went to America with prepossessions by no means unfavorable, and indeed
rather indulged in many of those illusive ideas, with respect to the
purity of the government and the primitive happiness of the people, which
I had early imbibed In my native country, where, unfortunately, discontent
at home enhances every distant temptation, and the western world has long
been looked to as a retreat from real or imaginary oppression; as, in
short, the elysian Atlantis, where persecuted patriots might find their
visions realized, and be welcomed by kindred spirits to liberty and
repose. In all these flattering expectations I found myself completely
disappointed, and felt inclined to say to America, as Horace says to his
mistress, "_intentata nites_." Brissot, in the preface to his travels,
observes, that "freedom in that country is carried to so high a degree as
to border upon a state of nature;" and there certainly is a close
approximation to savage life not only in the liberty which they enjoy, but
in the violence of party spirit and of private animosity which results
from it. This illiberal zeal imbitters all social intercourse; and, though
I scarcely could hesitate in selecting the party, whose views appeared to
me the more pure and rational, yet I was sorry to observe that, in
asserting their opinions, they both assume an equal share of intolerance;
the Democrats consistently with their principles, exhibiting a vulgarity
of rancor, which the Federalists too often are so forgetful of their cause
as to imitate.

The rude familiarity of the lower orders, and indeed the unpolished state
of society in general, would neither surprise nor disgust if they seemed
to flow from that simplicity of character, that honest ignorance of the
gloss of refinement which may be looked for in a new and inexperienced
people. But, when we find them arrived at maturity in most of the vices,
and all the pride of civilization, while they are still so far removed
from its higher and better characteristics, it is impossible not to feel
that this youthful decay, this crude anticipation of the natural period of
corruption, must repress every sanguine hope of the future energy and
greatness of America.

I am conscious that, in venturing these few remarks, I have said just
enough to offend, and by no means sufficient to convince; for the limits
of a preface prevent me from entering into a justification of my opinions,
and I am committed on the subject as effectually as if I had written
volumes in their defence. My reader, however, is apprised of the very
cursory observation upon which these opinions are founded, and can easily
decide for himself upon the degree of attention or confidence which they
merit.

With respect to the poems in general, which occupy the following pages, I
know not in what manner to apologize to the public for intruding upon
their notice such a mass of unconnected trifles, such a world of epicurean
atoms as I have here brought in conflict together. To say that I have been
tempted by the liberal offers of my bookseller, is an excuse which can
hope for but little indulgence from the critic; yet I own that, without
this seasonable inducement, these poems very possibly would never have
been submitted to the world. The glare of publication is too strong for
such imperfect productions: they should be shown but to the eye of
friendship, in that dim light of privacy which is as favorable to poetical
as to female beauty, and serves as a veil for faults, while it enhances
every charm which it displays. Besides, this is not a period for the idle
occupations of poetry, and times like the present require talents more
active and more useful. Few have now the leisure to read such trifles, and
I most sincerely regret that I have had the leisure to write them.


[1] This Preface, as well as the Dedication which precedes it, were
prefixed originally to the miscellaneous volume entitled "Odes and
Epistles," of which, hitherto, the poems relating to my American tour have
formed a part.

[2] Epistles VI., VII., and VIII.






POEMS RELATING TO AMERICA.






TO LORD VISCOUNT STRANGFORD.

ABOARD THE PHAETON FRIGATE, OFF THE AZORES, BY MOONLIGHT.


Sweet Moon! if, like Crotona's sage,[1]
  By any spell my hand could dare
To make thy disk its ample page,
  And write my thoughts, my wishes there;
How many a friend, whose careless eye
Now wanders o'er that starry sky,
Should smile, upon thy orb to meet
The recollection, kind and sweet,
The reveries of fond regret,
The promise, never to forget,
And all my heart and soul would send
To many a dear-loved, distant friend.

How little, when we parted last,
I thought those pleasant times were past,
For ever past, when brilliant joy
Was all my vacant heart's employ:
When, fresh from mirth to mirth again,
  We thought the rapid hours too few;
Our only use for knowledge then
  To gather bliss from all we knew.
Delicious days of whim and soul!
  When, mingling lore and laugh together,
We leaned the book on Pleasure's bowl,
  And turned the leaf with Folly's feather.
Little I thought that all were fled,
That, ere that summer's bloom was shed,
My eye should see the sail unfurled
That wafts me to the western world.

And yet, 'twas time;--in youth's sweet days,
To cool that season's glowing rays,
The heart awhile, with wanton wing,
May dip and dive in Pleasure's spring;
But, if it wait for winter's breeze,
The spring will chill, the heart will freeze.
And then, that Hope, that fairy Hope,--
  Oh! she awaked such happy dreams,
And gave my soul such tempting scope
  For all its dearest, fondest schemes,
_That not Verona's child of song_,
  When flying from the Phrygian shore,
With lighter heart could bound along,
  Or pant to be a wanderer more!

  Even now delusive hope will steal
Amid the dark regrets I feel,
Soothing, as yonder placid beam
  Pursues the murmurers of the deep,
And lights them with consoling gleam,
  And smiles them into tranquil sleep.
Oh! such a blessed night as this,
  I often think, if friends were near,
How we should feel, and gaze with bliss
  Upon the moon-bright scenery here!
The sea is like a silvery lake,
  And, o'er its calm the vessel glides
Gently, as if it feared to wake
  The slumber of the silent tides.
The only envious cloud that lowers
  Hath hung its shade on Pico's height,[2]
Where dimly, mid the dusk, he towers,
  And scowling at this heaven of light,
Exults to see the infant storm
  Cling darkly round his giant form!

Now, could I range those verdant isles,
  Invisible, at this soft hour,
And see the looks, the beaming smiles,
  That brighten many an orange bower;
And could I lift each pious veil,
  And see the blushing cheek it shades,--
Oh! I should have full many a tale,
  To tell of young Azorian maids.[3]
Yes, Strangford, at this hour, perhaps,
  Some lover (not too idly blest,
Like those, who in their ladies' laps
  May cradle every wish to rest,)
Warbles, to touch his dear one's soul,
  Those madrigals, of breath divine,
Which Camoens' harp from Rapture stole
  And gave, all glowing warm, to thine.[4]
Oh! could the lover learn from thee,
  And breathe them with thy graceful tone,
Such sweet, beguiling minstrelsy
  Would make the coldest nymph his own.

  But, hark!--the boatswain's pipings tell
'Tis time to bid my dream farewell:
Eight bells:--the middle watch is set;
Good night, my Strangford!--ne'er forget
That far beyond the western sea
Is one whose heart remembers thee.


[1] Pythagoras; who was supposed to have a power of writing upon the Moon
by the means of a magic mirror.--See _Boyle_, art. _Pythag_.

[2] A very high mountain on one of the Azores, from which the island
derives its name.  It is said by some to be as high as the Peak of
Teneriffe.

[3] I believe it is Gutherie who says, that the inhabitants of the Azores
are much addicted to gallantry.  This is an assertion in which even
Gutherie may be credited.

[4] These islands belong to the Portuguese.






STANZAS.


A beam of tranquillity smiled in the west,
 The storms of the morning pursued us no more;
And the wave, while it welcomed the moment of rest.
 Still heaved, as remembering ills that were o'er.

Serenely my heart took the hue of the hour,
  Its passions were sleeping, were mute as the dead;
And the spirit becalmed but remembered their power,
  As the billow the force of the gale that was fled.

I thought of those days, when to pleasure alone
  My heart ever granted a wish or a sigh;
When the saddest emotion my bosom had known,
  Was pity for those who were wiser than I.

I reflected, how soon in the cup of Desire
  The pearl of the soul may be melted away;
How quickly, alas, the pure sparkle of fire
  We inherit from heaven, may be quenched in the clay;

And I prayed of that Spirit who lighted the flame,
  That Pleasure no more might its purity dim;
So that, sullied but little, or brightly the same,
  I might give back the boon I had borrowed from Him.

How blest was the thought! it appeared as if Heaven
  Had already an opening to Paradise shown;
As if, passion all chastened and error forgiven,
  My heart then began to be purely its own.

I looked to the west, and the beautiful sky
  Which morning had clouded, was clouded no more:
"Oh! thus," I exclaimed, "may a heavenly eye
  "Shed light on the soul that was darkened before."






TO THE FLYING-FISH.[1]


When I have seen thy snow-white wing
From the blue wave at evening spring,
And show those scales of silvery white,
So gayly to the eye of light,
As if thy frame were formed to rise,
And live amid the glorious skies;
Oh! it has made me proudly feel,
How like thy wing's impatient zeal
Is the pure soul, that rests not, pent
Within this world's gross element,
But takes the wing that God has given,
And rises into light and heaven!

But, when I see that wing, so bright,
Grow languid with a moment's flight,
Attempt the paths of air in vain,
And sink into the waves again;
Alas! the flattering pride is o'er;
Like thee, awhile, the soul may soar,
But erring man must blush to think,
Like thee, again, the soul may sink.

Oh Virtue! when thy clime I seek,
Let not my spirit's flight be weak;
Let me not, like this feeble thing,
With brine still dropping from its wing,
Just sparkle in the solar glow
And plunge again to depths below;
But, when I leave the grosser throng
With whom my soul hath dwelt so long,
Let me, in that aspiring day,
Cast every lingering stain away,
And, panting for thy purer air,
Fly up at once and fix me there.


[1] It is the opinion of St. Austin upon Genesis, and I believe of nearly
all the Fathers, that birds, like fish, were originally produced from the
waters; in defence of which idea they have collected every fanciful
circumstance which can tend to prove a kindred similitude between them.
With this thought in our minds, when we first see the Flying-Fish, we
could almost fancy, that we are present at the moment of creation, and
witness the birth of the first bird from the waves.






TO MISS MOORE.

FROM NORFOLK, IN VIRGINIA, NOVEMBER, 1803.


In days, my Kate, when life was new,
When, lulled with innocence and you,
I heard, in home's beloved shade,
The din the world at distance made;
When, every night my weary head
Sunk on its own unthorned bed,
And, mild as evening's matron hour,
Looks on the faintly shutting flower,
A mother saw our eyelids close,
And blest them into pure repose;
Then, haply if a week, a day,
I lingered from that home away,
How long the little absence seemed!
How bright the look of welcome beamed,
As mute you heard, with eager smile,
My tales of all that past the while!

Yet now, my Kate, a gloomy sea
Bolls wide between that home and me;
The moon may thrice be born and die,
Ere even that seal can reach mine eye.
Which used so oft, so quick to come,
Still breathing all the breath of home,--
As if, still fresh, the cordial air
From lips beloved were lingering there.
But now, alas,--far different fate!
It comes o'er ocean, slow and late,
When the dear hand that filled its fold
With words of sweetness may lie cold.

But hence that gloomy thought! at last,
Beloved Kate, the waves are past;
I tread on earth securely now,
And the green cedar's living bough
Breathes more refreshment to my eyes
Than could a Claude's divinest dyes.
At length I touch the happy sphere
To liberty and virtue dear,
Where man looks up, and, proud to claim
His rank within the social frame,
Sees a grand system round him roll,
Himself its centre, sun, and soul!
Far from the shocks of Europe--far
From every wild, elliptic star
That, shooting with a devious fire,
Kindled by heaven's avenging ire,
So oft hath into chaos hurled
The systems of the ancient world.

The warrior here, in arms no more
Thinks of the toil, the conflict o'er,
And glorying in the freedom won
For hearth and shrine, for sire and son,
Smiles on the dusky webs that hide
His sleeping sword's remembered pride.
While Peace, with sunny cheeks of toil,
Walks o'er the free, unlorded soil,
Effacing with her splendid share
The drops that war had sprinkled there.
Thrice happy land! where he who flies
From the dark ills of other skies,
From scorn, or want's unnerving woes.
May shelter him in proud repose;
Hope sings along the yellow sand
His welcome to a patriot land:
The mighty wood, with pomp, receives
The stranger in its world of leaves,
Which soon their barren glory yield
To the warm shed and cultured field;
And he, who came, of all bereft,
To whom malignant fate had left
Nor hope nor friends nor country dear,
Finds home and friends and country here.

Such is the picture, warmly such,
That Fancy long, with florid touch.
Had painted to my sanguine eye
Of man's new world of liberty.
Oh! ask me not, if Truth have yet
Her seal on Fancy's promise set;
If even a glimpse my eyes behold
Of that imagined age of gold;--
Alas, not yet one gleaming trace![1]
Never did youth, who loved a face
As sketched by some fond pencil's skill,
And made by fancy lovelier still,
Shrink back with more of sad surprise,
When the live model met his eyes,
Than I have felt, in sorrow felt,
To find a dream on which I've dwelt
From boyhood's hour, thus fade and flee
At touch of stern reality!

But, courage, yet, my wavering heart!
Blame not the temple's meanest part,[2]
Till thou hast traced the fabric o'er;--
As yet, we have beheld no more
Than just the porch to Freedom's fame;
And, though a sable spot may stain
The vestibule, 'tis wrong, 'tis sin
To doubt the godhead reigns within!
So here I pause--and now, my Kate,
To you, and those dear friends, whose fate
Touches more near this home-sick soul
Than all the Powers from pole to pole,
One word at parting,--in the tone
Most sweet to you, and most my own,
The simple strain I send you here,
Wild though it be, would charm your ear,
Did you but know the trance of thought
In which my mind its numbers caught.
'Twas one of those half-waking dreams,
That haunt me oft, when music seems
To bear my soul in sound along,
And turn its feelings all to song.
I thought of home, the according lays
Came full of dreams of other days;
Freshly in each succeeding note
I found some young remembrance float,
Till following, as a clue, that strain
I wandered back to home, again.

Oh! love the song, and let it oft
Live on your lip, in accents soft.
Say that it tells you, simply well,
All I have bid its wild notes tell,--
Of Memory's dream, of thoughts that yet
Glow with the light of joy that's set,
And all the fond heart keeps in store
Of friends and scenes beheld no more.
And now, adieu!--this artless air,
With a few rhymes, in transcript fair,
Are all the gifts I yet can boast
To send you from Columbia's coast;
But when the sun, with warmer smile.
Shall light me to my destined isle.[3]
You shall have many a cowslip-bell,
Where Ariel slept, and many a shell,
In which that gentle spirit drew
From honey flowers the morning dew.


[1] Such romantic works as "The American Farmer's Letters," and the
account of Kentucky by Imlay, would seduce us into a belief, that
innocence, peace, and freedom had deserted the rest of the world for
Martha's Vineyard and the banks of the Ohio.

[2] Norfolk, it must be owned, presents an unfavorable specimen of
America. The characteristics of Virginia in general are not such as can
delight either the politician or the moralist, and at Norfolk they are
exhibited in their least attractive form. At the time when we arrived the
yellow fever had not yet disappeared, and every odor that assailed us in
the streets very strongly accounted for its visitation.

[3] Bermuda.






A BALLAD.

THE LAKE OF THE DISMAL SWAMP.

WRITTEN AT NORFOLK, IN VIRGINIA.


    "They tell of a young man, who lost his mind upon the death of a girl
    he loved, and who, suddenly disappearing from his friends, was never
    afterwards heard of. As he had frequently said, in his ravings, that
    the girl was not dead, but gone to the Dismal Swamp, it is supposed he
    had wandered into that dreary wilderness, and had died of hunger, or
    been lost in some of its dreadful morasses."--Anon.


    _"La Poesie a ses monstres comme la nature."_
    D'ALEMBERT.


"They made her a grave, too cold and damp
  "For a soul so warm and true;
"And she's gone to the Lake of the Dismal Swamp,[1]
  "Where, all night long, by a firefly lamp,
"She paddles her white canoe.

"And her fire-fly lamp I soon shall see,
  "And her paddle I soon shall hear;
"Long and loving our life shall be,
"And I'll hide the maid in a cypress tree,
  "When the footstep of death is near."

Away to the Dismal Swamp he speeds--
  His path was rugged and sore,
Through tangled juniper, beds of reeds,
Through many a fen, where the serpent feeds,
  And man never trod before.

And, when on the earth he sunk to sleep
  If slumber his eyelids knew,
He lay, where the deadly vine doth weep
Its venomous tear and nightly steep
  The flesh with blistering dew!

And near him the she-wolf stirred the brake,
  And the copper-snake breathed in his ear,
Till he starting cried, from his dream awake,
"Oh! when shall I see the dusky Lake,
  "And the white canoe of my dear?"

He saw the Lake, and a meteor bright
  Quick over its surface played--
"Welcome," he said, "my dear one's light!"
And the dim shore echoed, for many a night,
  The name of the death-cold maid.

Till he hollowed a boat of the birchen bark,
  Which carried him off from shore;
Far, far he followed the meteor spark,
The wind was high and the clouds were dark,
  And the boat returned no more.

But oft, from the Indian hunter's camp
  This lover and maid so true
Are seen at the hour of midnight damp
To cross the Lake by a fire-fly lamp,
  And paddle their white canoe!


[1] The Great Dismal Swamp is ten or twelve miles distant from
Norfolk, and the Lake in the middle of it (about seven miles long) is
called Drummond's Pond.






TO THE MARCHIONESS DOWAGER OF DONEGALL.

FROM BERMUDA, JANUARY, 1804.


Lady! where'er you roam, whatever land
Woos the bright touches of that artist hand;
Whether you sketch the valley's golden meads,
Where mazy Linth his lingering current leads;[1]
Enamored catch the mellow hues that sleep,
At eve, on Meillerie's immortal steep;
Or musing o'er the Lake, at day's decline,
Mark the last shadow on that holy shrine,[2]
Where, many a night, the shade of Tell complains
Of Gallia's triumph and Helvetia's chains;
Oh! lay the pencil for a moment by,
Turn from the canvas that creative eye,
And let its splendor, like the morning ray
Upon a shepherd's harp, illume my lay.

Yet, Lady, no--for song so rude as mine,
Chase not the wonders of your art divine;
Still, radiant eye, upon the canvas dwell;
Still, magic finger, weave your potent spell;
And, while I sing the animated smiles
Of fairy nature in these sun-born isles,
Oh, might the song awake some bright design,
Inspire a touch, or prompt one happy line,
Proud were my soul, to see its humble thought
On painting's mirror so divinely caught;
While wondering Genius, as he leaned to trace
The faint conception kindling into grace,
Might love my numbers for the spark they threw,
And bless the lay that lent a charm to you.

Say, have you ne'er, in nightly vision, strayed
To those pure isles of ever-blooming shade,
Which bards of old, with kindly fancy, placed
For happy spirits in the Atlantic waste?
There listening, while, from earth, each breeze that came
Brought echoes of their own undying fame,
In eloquence of eye, and dreams of song,
They charmed their lapse of nightless hours along:--
Nor yet in song, that mortal ear might suit,
For every spirit was itself a lute,
Where Virtue wakened, with elysian breeze,
Pure tones of thought and mental harmonies.

Believe me, Lady, when the zephyrs bland
Floated our bark to this enchanted land,--
These leafy isles upon the ocean thrown,
Like studs of emerald o'er a silver zone,--
Not all the charm, that ethnic fancy gave
To blessed arbors o'er the western wave,
Could wake a dream, more soothing or sublime,
Of bowers ethereal, and the Spirit's clime.

  Bright rose the morning, every wave was still,
When the first perfume of a cedar hill
Sweetly awaked us, and, with smiling charms,
The fairy harbor woo'd us to its arms.[3]
Gently we stole, before the whispering wind,
Through plaintain shades, that round, like awnings, twined
And kist on either side the wanton sails,
Breathing our welcome to these vernal vales;
While, far reflected o'er the wave serene,
Each wooded island shed so soft a green
That the enamored keel, with whispering play,
Through liquid herbage seemed to steal its way.

  Never did weary bark more gladly glide,
Or rest its anchor in a lovelier tide!
Along the margin, many a shining dome,
White as the palace of a Lapland gnome,
Brightened the wave;--in every myrtle grove
Secluded bashful, like a shrine of love,
Some elfin mansion sparkled through the shade;
And, while the foliage interposing played,
Lending the scene an ever-changing grace,
Fancy would love, in glimpses vague, to trace
The flowery capital, the shaft, the porch,[4]
And dream of temples, till her kindling torch
Lighted me back to all the glorious days
Of Attic genius; and I seemed to gaze
On marble, from the rich Pentelio mount,
Gracing the umbrage of some Naiad's fount.

  Then thought I, too, of thee, most sweet of all
The spirit race that come at poet's call,
Delicate Ariel! who, in brighter hours,
Lived on the perfume of these honied bowers,
In velvet buds, at evening, loved to lie,
And win with music every rose's sigh.
Though weak the magic of my humble strain
To charm your spirit from its orb again,
Yet, oh, for her, beneath whose smile I sing,
For her (whose pencil, if your rainbow wing
Were dimmed or ruffled by a wintry sky.
Could smooth its feather and relume its dye.)
Descend a moment from your starry sphere,
And, if the lime-tree grove that once was dear,
The sunny wave, the bower, the breezy hill,
The sparkling grotto can delight you still,
Oh cull their choicest tints, their softest light,
Weave all these spells into one dream of night,
And, while the lovely artist slumbering lies,
Shed the warm picture o'er her mental eyes;
Take for the task her own creative spells,
And brightly show what song but faintly tells.


[1] Lady Donegall, I had reason to suppose, was at this time still in
Switzerland, where the well-known powers of her pencil must have been
frequently awakened.

[2] The chapel of William Tell on the Lake of Lucerne.

[3] Nothing can be more romantic than the little harbor of St. George's.
The number of beautiful islets, the singular clearness of the water, and
the animated play of the graceful little boats, gliding for ever between
the islands, and seeming to sail from one cedar-grove into another, formed
altogether as lovely a miniature of nature's beauties as can be imagined.

[4] This is an illusion which, to the few who are fanciful enough to
indulge in it, renders the scenery of Bermuda particularly interesting. In
the short but beautiful twilight of their spring evenings, the white
cottages, scattered over the islands, and but partially seen through the
trees that surround them, assume often the appearance of little Grecian
temples; and a vivid fancy may embellish the poor fisherman's hut with
columns such as the pencil of a Claude might imitate. I had one favorite
object of this kind in my walks, which the hospitality of its owner robbed
me of, by asking me to visit him. He was a plain good man, and received me
well and warmly, but I could never turn his house into a Grecian temple
again.






TO GEORGE MORGAN, ESQ. OF NORFOLK, VIRGINIA.

FROM BERMUDA, JANUARY, 1804.


Oh, what a sea of storm we've past!--
  High mountain waves and foamy showers,
And battling winds whose savage blast
  But ill agrees with one whose hours
  Have past in old Anacreon's bowers,
Yet think not poesy's bright charm
Forsook me in this rude alarm;[1]--
When close they reefed the timid sail,
  When, every plank complaining loud,
We labored in the midnight gale;
And even our haughty mainmast bowed,
Even then, in that unlovely hour,
The Muse still brought her soothing power,
And, midst the war of waves and wind,
In song's Elysium lapt my mind.
Nay, when no numbers of my own
Responded to her wakening tone,
She opened, with her golden key,
  The casket where my memory lays
Those gems of classic poesy,
  Which time has saved from ancient days.
Take one of these, to Lais sung,--
I wrote it while my hammock swung,
As one might write a dissertation
Upon "Suspended Animation!"

Sweet is your kiss, my Lais dear,
But, with that kiss I feel a tear
Gush from your eyelids, such as start
When those who've dearly loved must part.
Sadly you lean your head to mine,
And mute those arms around me twine,
Your hair adown my bosom spread,
All glittering with the tears you shed.
In vain I've kist those lids of snow,
For still, like ceaseless founts they flow,
Bathing our cheeks, whene'er they meet.
Why is it thus? Do, tell me, sweet!
Ah, Lais! are my bodings right?
Am I to lose you? Is to-night
Our last--go, false to heaven and me!
Your very tears are treachery.

Such, while in air I floating hung,
  Such was the strain, Morgante mio!
The muse and I together sung,
  With Boreas to make out the trio.
But, bless the little fairy isle!
  How sweetly after all our ills.
We saw the sunny morning smile
  Serenely o'er its fragrant hills;
And felt the pure, delicious flow
Of airs that round this Eden blow
Freshly as even the gales that come
O'er our own healthy hills at home.

Could you but view the scenery fair,
  That now beneath my window lies,
You'd think, that nature lavished there
  Her purest wave, her softest skies,
To make a heaven for love to sigh in,
For bards to live and saints to die in.
Close to my wooded bank below,
  In grassy calm the waters sleep,
And to the sunbeam proudly show
  The coral rocks they love to steep.[2]
The fainting breeze of morning fails;
  The drowsy boat moves slowly past,
And I can almost touch its sails
  As loose they flap around the mast.
The noontide sun a splendor pours
That lights up all these leafy shores;
While his own heaven, its clouds
and beams,
  So pictured in the waters lie,
That each small bark, in passing, seems
  To float along a burning sky.

Oh for the pinnace lent to thee,[3]
  Blest dreamer, who in vision bright,
Didst sail o'er heaven's solar sea
  And touch at all its isles of light.
Sweet Venus, what a clime he found
Within thy orb's ambrosial round--
There spring the breezes, rich and warm,
  That sigh around thy vesper car;
And angels dwell, so pure of form
  That each appears a living star.
These are the sprites, celestial queen!
  Thou sendest nightly to the bed
Of her I love, with touch unseen
  Thy planet's brightening tints to shed;
To lend that eye a light still clearer,
  To give that cheek one rose-blush more.
And bid that blushing lip be dearer,
  Which had been all too dear before.

But, whither means the muse to roam?
'Tis time to call the wanderer home.
Who could have thought the nymph would perch her
Up in the clouds with Father Kircher?
So, health and love to all your mansion!
  Long may the bowl that pleasures bloom in,
The flow of heart, the soul's expansion,
  Mirth and song, your board illumine.
At all your feasts, remember too,
  When cups are sparkling to the brim,
That here is one who drinks to you,
  And, oh! as warmly drink to him.


[1] We were seven days on our passage from Norfolk to Bermuda, during
three of which we were forced to lay-to in a gale of wind. The Driver
sloop of war, in which I went, was built at Bermuda of cedar, and is
accounted an excellent sea-boat. She was then commanded by my very
regretted friend Captain Compton, who in July last was killed aboard the
Lily in an action with a French privateer. Poor Compton! he fell a victim
to the strange impolicy of allowing such a miserable thing as the Lily to
remain in the service: so small, crank, and unmanageable, that a
well-manned merchantman was at any time a match for her.

[2] The water is so clear around the island, that the rocks are seen
beneath to a very great depth; and, as we entered the harbor, they
appeared to us so near the surface that it seemed impossible we should not
strike on them. There is no necessity, of course, for having the lead; and
the negro pilot, looking down at the rocks from the bow of the ship, takes
her through this difficult navigation, with a skill and confidence which
seem to astonish some of the oldest sailors.

[3] In Kircher's "Ecstatic Journey to Heaven." Cosmel, the genius of the
world, gives Theodidacticus a boat of asbestos, with which he embarks into
the regions of the sun.






LINES WRITTEN IN A STORM AT SEA.


That sky of clouds is not the sky
To light a lover to the pillow
    Of her he loves--
The swell of yonder foaming billow
Resembles not the happy sigh
    That rapture moves.

Yet do I feel more tranquil far
Amid the gloomy wilds of ocean,
    In this dark hour,
Than when, in passion's young emotion,
I've stolen, beneath the evening star,
    To Julia's bower.

Oh! there's a holy calm profound
In awe like this, that ne'er was given
    To pleasure's thrill;
'Tis as a solemn voice from heaven,
And the soul, listening to the sound,
    Lies mute and still.

'Tis true, it talks of danger nigh,
Of slumbering with the dead tomorrow
    In the cold deep,
Where pleasure's throb or tears of sorrow
No more shall wake the heart or eye,
    But all must sleep.

Well!--there are some, thou stormy bed,
To whom thy sleep would be a treasure;
    Oh! most to him,
Whose lip hath drained life's cup of pleasure,
Nor left one honey drop to shed
    Round sorrow's brim.

Yes--_he_ can smile serene at death:
Kind heaven, do thou but chase the weeping
    Of friends who love him;
Tell them that he lies calmly sleeping
Where sorrow's sting or envy's breath
    No more shall move him.






ODES TO NEA;

WRITTEN AT BERMUDA.


   [Greek: NEA turannei]
    EURPID. "_Medea_," v. 967.


Nay, tempt me not to love again,
  There was a time when love was sweet;
Dear Nea! had I known thee then,
  Our souls had not been slow to meet.
But, oh, this weary heart hath run,
  So many a time, the rounds of pain,
Not even for thee, thou lovely one,
  Would I endure such pangs again.

  If there be climes, where never yet
The print of beauty's foot was set,
Where man may pass his loveless nights,
Unfevered by her false delights,
Thither my wounded soul would fly,
Where rosy cheek or radiant eye
Should bring no more their bliss, or pain,
Nor fetter me to earth again.
Dear absent girl! whose eyes of light,
  Though little prized when all my own,
Now float before me, soft and bright
  As when they first enamoring shone,--
What hours and days have I seen glide,
While fit, enchanted, by thy side,
Unmindful of the fleeting day,
I've let life's dream dissolve away.
O bloom of youth profusely shed!
O moments I simply, vainly sped,
Yet sweetly too--or Love perfumed
The flame which thus my life consumed;
And brilliant was the chain of flowers,
In which he led my victim-hours.

  Say, Nea, say, couldst thou, like her,
When warm to feel and quick to err,
Of loving fond, of roving fonder,
This thoughtless soul might wish to wander,--
Couldst thou, like her, the wish reclaim,
  Endearing still, reproaching never,
Till even this heart should burn with shame,
  And be thy own more fixt than ever,
No, no--on earth there's only one
  Could bind such faithless folly fast;
And sure on earth but one alone
  Could make such virtue false at last!

Nea, the heart which she forsook,
  For thee were but a worthless shrine--
Go, lovely girl, that angel look
  Must thrill a soul more pure than mine.
Oh! thou shalt be all else to me,
That heart can feel or tongue can feign;
I'll praise, admire, and worship thee,
  But must not, dare not, love again.

       *       *       *       *       *

    --_tale iter omne cave. _
    PROPERT. _lib. iv. eleg. 8_.

I pray you, let us roam no more
Along that wild and lonely shore,
  Where late we thoughtless strayed;
'Twas not for us, whom heaven intends
To be no more than simple friends,
  Such lonely walks were made.

That little Bay, where turning in
From ocean's rude and angry din,
  As lovers steal to bliss,
The billows kiss the shore, and then
Flow back into the deep again,
  As though they did not kiss.

Remember, o'er its circling flood
In what a dangerous dream we stood--
  The silent sea before us,
Around us, all the gloom of grove,
That ever lent its shade to love,
  No eye but heaven's o'er us!

I saw you blush, you felt me tremble,
In vain would formal art dissemble
  All we then looked and thought;
'Twas more than tongue could dare reveal,
'Twas every thing that young hearts feel,
  By Love and Nature taught.

I stopped to cull, with faltering hand,
A shell that, on the golden sand,
  Before us faintly gleamed;
I trembling raised it, and when you
Had kist the shell, I kist it too--
  How sweet, how wrong it seemed!

Oh, trust me, 'twas a place, an hour,
The worst that e'er the tempter's power
  Could tangle me or you in;
Sweet Nea, let us roam no more
Along that wild and lonely shore.
  Such walks may be our ruin.

       *       *       *       *       *

You read it in these spell-bound eyes,
  And there alone should love be read;
You hear me say it all in sighs,
  And thus alone should love be said.

Then dread no more; I will not speak;
  Although my heart to anguish thrill,
I'll spare the burning of your cheek,
  And look it all in silence still.

Heard you the wish I dared to name,
  To murmur on that luckless night,
When passion broke the bonds of shame,
  And love grew madness in your sight?

Divinely through the graceful dance,
  You seemed to float in silent song,
Bending to earth that sunny glance,
  As if to light your steps along.

Oh! how could others dare to touch
  That hallowed form with hand so free,
When but to look was bliss too much,
  Too rare for all but Love and me!

With smiling eyes, that little thought,
How fatal were the beams they threw,
My trembling hands you lightly caught,
  And round me, like a spirit, flew.

Heedless of all, but you alone,--
  And _you_, at least, should not condemn.
If, when such eyes before me shone,
  My soul forgot all eyes but them,--

I dared to whisper passion's vow,--
  For love had even of thought bereft me,--
Nay, half-way bent to kiss that brow,
  But, with a bound, you blushing left me.

Forget, forget that night's offence,
  Forgive it, if, alas! you can;
'Twas love, 'twas passion--soul and sense--
  'Twas all that's best and worst in man.

That moment, did the assembled eyes
Of heaven and earth my madness view,
I should have seen, thro' earth and skies,
  But you alone--but only you.

Did not a frown from you reprove.
  Myriads of eyes to me were none;
Enough for me to win your love,
  And die upon the spot, when won.






A DREAM OF ANTIQUITY.


I just had turned the classic page.
  And traced that happy period over,
When blest alike were youth and age,
And love inspired the wisest sage,
  And wisdom graced the tenderest lover.

Before I laid me down to sleep
  Awhile I from the lattice gazed
Upon that still and moonlight deep,
  With isles like floating gardens raised,
For Ariel there his sports to keep;
While, gliding 'twixt their leafy shores
The lone night-fisher plied his oars.

I felt,--so strongly fancy's power
Came o'er me in that witching hour,--
As if the whole bright scenery there
  Were lighted by a Grecian sky,
And I then breathed the blissful air
  That late had thrilled to Sappho's sigh.

Thus, waking, dreamt I,--and when Sleep
  Came o'er my sense, the dream went on;
Nor, through her curtain dim and deep,
  Hath ever lovelier vision shone.
I thought that, all enrapt, I strayed
Through that serene, luxurious shade,
Where Epicurus taught the Loves
  To polish virtue's native brightness,--
As pearls, we're told, that fondling doves
  Have played with, wear a smoother whiteness.[1]
'Twas one of those delicious nights
  So common in the climes of Greece,
When day withdraws but half its lights,
  And all is moonshine, balm, and peace.
And thou wert there, my own beloved,
And by thy side I fondly roved
Through many a temple's reverend gloom,
And many a bower's seductive bloom,
Where Beauty learned what Wisdom taught.
And sages sighed and lovers thought;
Where schoolmen conned no maxims stern,
  But all was formed to soothe or move,
To make the dullest love to learn,
  To make the coldest learn to love.

And now the fairy pathway seemed
  To lead us through enchanted ground,
Where all that bard has ever dreamed
  Of love or luxury bloomed around.
Oh! 'twas a bright, bewildering scene--
Along the alley's deepening green
Soft lamps, that hung like burning flowers,
And scented and illumed the bowers,
Seemed, as to him, who darkling roves,
Amid the lone Hercynian groves,
Appear those countless birds of light,
That sparkle in the leaves at night,
And from their wings diffuse a ray
Along the traveller's weary way.

'Twas light of that mysterious kind.
  Through which the soul perchance may roam,
When it has left this world behind,
  And gone to seek its heavenly home.
And, Nea, thou wert by my side,
Through all this heavenward path my guide.

But, lo, as wandering thus we ranged
That upward path, the vision changed;
And now, methought, we stole along
  Through halls of more voluptuous glory
Than ever lived in Teian song,
  Or wantoned in Milesian story.[2]

And nymphs were there, whose very eyes
Seemed softened o'er with breath of sighs;
Whose every ringlet, as it wreathed,
A mute appeal to passion breathed.

Some flew, with amber cups, around,
  Pouring the flowery wines of Crete;
And, as they passed with youthful bound,
  The onyx shone beneath their feet.[3]
While others, waving arms of snow
  Entwined by snakes of burnished gold,[4]
And showing charms, as loth to show,
  Through many a thin, Tarentian fold,
Glided among the festal throng
Bearing rich urns of flowers along
Where roses lay, in languor breathing,
And the young beegrape, round them wreathing,
Hung on their blushes warm and meek,
Like curls upon a rosy cheek.

Oh, Nea! why did morning break
  The spell that thus divinely bound me?
Why did I wake? how _could_ I wake
  With thee my own and heaven around me!

       *       *       *       *       *

Well--peace to thy heart, though another's it be,
And health to that cheek, though it bloom not for me!
To-morrow I sail for those cinnamon groves,
Where nightly the ghost of the Carribee roves,
And, far from the light of those eyes, I may yet
Their allurements forgive and their splendor forget.

Farewell to Bermuda,[5] and long may the bloom
Of the lemon and myrtle its valleys perfume;
May spring to eternity hallow the shade,
Where Ariel has warbled and Waller has strayed.

And thou--when, at dawn, thou shalt happen to roam
Through the lime-covered alley that leads to thy home,
Where oft, when the dance and the revel were done,
And the stars were beginning to fade in the sun,
I have led thee along, and have told by the way
What my heart all the night had been burning to say--
Oh! think of the past--give a sigh to those times,
And a blessing for me to that alley of limes.

       *       *       *       *       *

If I were yonder wave, my dear,
  And thou the isle it clasps around,
I would not let a foot come near
  My land of bliss, my fairy ground.

If I were yonder couch of gold,
  And thou the pearl within it placed,
I would not let an eye behold
  The sacred gem my arms embraced.

If I were yonder orange-tree,
  And thou the blossom blooming there,
I would not yield a breath of thee
  To scent the most imploring air.

Oh! bend not o'er the water's brink,
  Give not the wave that odorous sigh,
Nor let its burning mirror drink
  The soft reflection of thine eye.

That glossy hair, that glowing cheek,
  So pictured in the waters seem,
That I could gladly plunge to seek
  Thy image in the glassy stream.

Blest fate! at once my chilly grave
  And nuptial bed that stream might be;
I'll wed thee in its mimic wave.
  And die upon the shade of thee.

Behold the leafy mangrove, bending
  O'er the waters blue and bright,
Like Nea's silky lashes, lending
  Shadow to her eyes of light.

Oh, my beloved! where'er I turn,
  Some trace of thee enchants mine eyes:
In every star thy glances burn;
  Thy blush on every floweret lies.

Nor find I in creation aught
  Of bright or beautiful or rare,
Sweet to the sense of pure to thought,
  But thou art found reflected there.


[1] This method of polishing pearls, by leaving them awhile to be played
with by doves, is mentioned by the fanciful Cardanus.

[2] The Milesiacs, or Milesian fables, had their origin in Miletus, a
luxurious town of Ionia. Aristides was the most celebrated author of these
licentious fictions.

[3] It appears that in very splendid mansions the floor or pavement was
frequently of onyx.

[4] Bracelets of this shape were a favorite ornament among the women of
antiquity.

[5] The inhabitants pronounce the name as if it were written Bermooda. I
wonder it did not occur to some of those all-reading gentlemen that,
possibly, the discoverer of this "island of hogs and devils" might have
been no less a personage than the great John Bermudez, who, about the same
period (the beginning of the sixteenth century), was sent Patriarch of the
Latin church to Ethiopia, and has left us most wonderful stories of the
Amazons and the Griffins which he encountered.--_Travels of the Jesuits_,
vol. i.






THE SNOW SPIRIT.


No, ne'er did the wave in its element steep
  An island of lovelier charms;
It blooms in the giant embrace of the deep,
  Like Hebe in Hercules' arms.
The blush of your bowers is light to the eye,
  And their melody balm to the ear;
But the fiery planet of day is too nigh,
  And the Snow Spirit never comes here.

The down from his wing is as white as the pearl
  That shines through thy lips when they part,
And it falls on the green earth as melting, my girl,
  As a murmur of thine on the heart.
Oh! fly to the clime, where he pillows the death,
  As he cradles the birth of the year;
Bright are your bowers and balmy their breath,
  But the Snow Spirit cannot come here.

How sweet to behold him when borne on the gale,
  And brightening the bosom of morn,
He flings, like the priest of Diana, a veil
  O'er the brow of each virginal thorn.
Yet think not the veil he so chillingly casts
  Is the veil of a vestal severe;
No, no, thou wilt see, what a moment it lasts,
  Should the Snow Spirit ever come here.

But fly to his region--lay open thy zone,
  And he'll weep all his brilliancy dim,
To think that a bosom, as white as his own,
  Should not melt in the daybeam like him.
Oh! lovely the print of those delicate feet
  O'er his luminous path will appear--
Fly, my beloved! this island is sweet,
  But the Snow Spirit cannot come here.

       *        *        *        *        *

  I stole along the flowery bank,
While many a bending seagrape[1] drank
The sprinkle of the feathery oar
That winged me round this fairy shore.

  'Twas noon; and every orange bud
Hung languid o'er the crystal flood,
Faint as the lids of maiden's eyes
When love-thoughts in her bosom rise.
Oh, for a naiad's sparry bower,
To shade me in that glowing hour!

  A little dove, of milky hue,
Before me from a plantain flew,
And, light along the water's brim,
I steered my gentle bark by him;
For fancy told me, Love had sent
This gentle bird with kind intent
To lead my steps, where I should meet--
I knew not what, but something sweet.

  And--bless the little pilot dove!
He had indeed been sent by Love,
To guide me to a scene so dear
As fate allows but seldom here;
One of those rare and brilliant hours.
That, like the aloe's lingering flowers,
May blossom to the eye of man
But once in all his weary span.

  Just where the margin's opening shade
A vista from the waters made,
My bird reposed his silver plume
Upon a rich banana's bloom.
Oh vision bright! oh spirit fair!
What spell, what magic raised her there?
'Twas Nea! slumbering calm and mild,
And bloomy as the dimpled child,
Whose spirit in elysium keeps
Its playful sabbath, while he sleeps.

  The broad banana's green embrace
Hung shadowy round each tranquil grace;
One little beam alone could win
The leaves to let it wander in.
And, stealing over all her charms,
From lip to cheek, from neck to arms,
New lustre to each beauty lent,--
Itself all trembling as it went!

  Dark lay her eyelid's jetty fringe
Upon that cheek whose roseate tinge
Mixt with its shade, like evening's light
Just touching on the verge of night.
Her eyes, though thus in slumber hid,
Seemed glowing through the ivory lid,
And, as I thought, a lustre threw
Upon her lip's reflecting dew,--
Such as a night-lamp, left to shine
Alone on some secluded shrine,
May shed upon the votive wreath,
Which pious hands have hung beneath.

  Was ever vision half so sweet!
Think, think how quick my heart-pulse beat,
As o'er the rustling bank I stole;--
Oh! ye, that know the lover's soul,
It is for you alone to guess,
That moment's trembling happiness.


[1] The seaside or mangrove grape, a native of the West Indies.






A STUDY FROM THE ANTIQUE.


Behold, my love, the curious gem
  Within this simple ring of gold;
'Tis hallow'd by the touch of them
  Who lived in classic hours of old.

Some fair Athenian girl, perhaps,
  Upon her hand this gem displayed,
Nor thought that time's succeeding lapse
  Should see it grace a lovelier maid.

Look, dearest, what a sweet design!
  The more we gaze, it charms the more;
Come--closer bring that cheek to mine,
  And trace with me its beauties o'er.

Thou seest, it is a simple youth
  By some enamored nymph embraced--
Look, as she leans, and say in sooth
  Is not that hand most fondly placed?

Upon his curled head behind
  It seems in careless play to lie,
Yet presses gently, half inclined
  To bring the truant's lip more nigh.

Oh happy maid! Too happy boy!
  The one so fond and little loath,
The other yielding slow to joy--
  Oh rare, indeed, but blissful both.

Imagine, love, that I am he,
  And just as warm as he is chilling;
Imagine, too, that thou art she,
  But quite as coy as she is willing:

So may we try the graceful way
  In which their gentle arms are twined,
And thus, like her, my hand I lay
  Upon thy wreathed locks behind:

And thus I feel thee breathing sweet,
  As slow to mine thy head I move;
And thus our lips together meet,
  And thus,--and thus,--I kiss thee, love.

       *       *       *       *       *

There's not a look, a word of thine,
  My soul hath e'er forgot;
Thou ne'er hast bid a ringlet shine,
Nor given thy locks one graceful twine
  Which I remember not.

There never yet a murmur fell
  From that beguiling tongue,
Which did not, with a lingering spell,
Upon thy charmed senses dwell,
  Like songs from Eden sung.

Ah! that I could, at once, forget
  All, all that haunts me so--
And yet, thou witching girl,--and yet,
To die were sweeter than to let
  The loved remembrance go.

No; if this slighted heart must see
  Its faithful pulse decay,
Oh let it die, remembering thee,
And, like the burnt aroma, be
  Consumed in sweets away.






TO JOSEPH ATKINSON, ESQ.

FROM BERMUDA.[1]


"The daylight is gone--but, before we depart,
"One cup shall go round to the friend of my heart,
"The kindest, the dearest--oh! judge by the tear
"I now shed while I name him, how kind and how dear."

  'Twas thus in the shade of the Calabash-Tree,
With a few, who could feel and remember like me,
The charm that, to sweeten my goblet, I threw
Was a sigh to the past and a blessing on you.

  Oh! say, is it thus, in the mirth-bringing hour,
When friends are assembled, when wit, in full flower,
Shoots forth from the lip, under Bacchus's dew,
In blossoms of thought ever springing and new--
Do you sometimes remember, and hallow the brim
Of your cup with a sigh, as you crown it to him
Who is lonely and sad in these valleys so fair,
And would pine in elysium, if friends were not there!

  Last night, when we came from the Calabash-Tree,
When my limbs were at rest and my spirit was free,
The glow of the grape and the dreams of the day
Set the magical springs of my fancy in play,
And oh,--such a vision as haunted me then
I would slumber for ages to witness again.
The many I like, and the few I adore,
The friends who were dear and beloved before.
But never till now so beloved and dear,
At the call of my Fancy, surrounded me here;
And soon,--oh, at once, did the light of their smiles
To a paradise brighten this region of isles;
More lucid the wave, as they looked on it, flowed,
And brighter the rose, as they gathered it, glowed.
Not the valleys Heraean (though watered by rills
Of the pearliest flow, from those pastoral hills.[2]
Where the Song of the Shepherd, primeval and wild,
Was taught to the nymphs by their mystical child,)
Could boast such a lustre o'er land and o'er wave
As the magic of love to this paradise gave.

  Oh magic of love! unembellished by you,
Hath the garden a blush or the landscape a hue?
Or shines there a vista in nature or art,
Like that which Love opes thro' the eye to the heart?

  Alas, that a vision so happy should fade!
That, when morning around me in brilliancy played,
The rose and the stream I had thought of at night
Should still be before me, unfadingly bright;
While the friends, who had seemed to hang over the stream,
And to gather the roses, had fled with my dream.

  But look, where, all ready, in sailing array,
The bark that's to carry these pages away,[3]
Impatiently flutters her wing to the wind,
And will soon leave these islets of Ariel behind.
What billows, what gales is she fated to prove,
Ere she sleep in the lee of the land that I love!
Yet pleasant the swell of the billows would be,
And the roar of those gales would be music to me.
Not the tranquillest air that the winds ever blew,
Not the sunniest tears of the summer-eve dew,
Were as sweet as the storm, or as bright as the foam
Of the surge, that would hurry your wanderer home.


[1] Pinkerton has said that "a good history and description of the
Bermudas might afford a pleasing addition to the geographical library;"
but there certainly are not materials for such a work. The island, since
the time of its discovery, has experienced so very few vicissitudes, the
people have been so indolent, and their trade so limited, that there is
but little which the historian could amplify into importance; and, with
respect to the natural productions of the country, the few which the
inhabitants can be induced to cultivate are so common in the West Indies,
that they have been described by every naturalist who has written any
account of those islands.

[2] Mountains of Sicily, upon which Daphnis, the first Inventor of bucolic
poetry, was nursed by the nymphs.

[3] A ship, ready to sail for England.






THE STEERMAN'S SONG,

WRITTEN ABOARD THE BOSTON FRIGATE

28TH APRIL.[1]


When freshly blows the northern gale,
  And under courses snug we fly;
Or when light breezes swell the sail,
  And royals proudly sweep the sky;
'Longside the wheel, unwearied still
  I stand, and, as my watchful eye
Doth mark the needle's faithful thrill,
  I think of her I love, and cry,
    Port, my boy! port.

When calms delay, or breezes blow
  Right from the point we wish to steer;
When by the wind close-hauled we go.
  And strive in vain the port to near;
I think 'tis thus the fates defer
  My bliss with one that's far away,
And while remembrance springs to her,
  I watch the sails and sighing say,
    Thus, my boy! thus.

But see the wind draws kindly aft,
  All hands are up the yards to square,
And now the floating stu'n-sails waft
  Our stately ship thro' waves and air.
Oh! then I think that yet for me
  Some breeze of fortune thus may spring,
Some breeze to waft me, love, to thee--
  And in that hope I smiling sing,
    Steady, boy! so.


[1] I left Bermuda in the Boston about the middle of April, in
company with the Cambrian and Leander, aboard the latter of which was the
Admiral Sir Andrew Mitchell, who divides his year between Halifax and
Bermuda, and is the very soul of society and good-fellowship to both. We
separated in a few days, and the Boston after a short cruise proceeded to
New York.






TO THE FIRE-FLY.[1]


At morning, when the earth and sky
  Are glowing with the light of spring,
We see thee not, thou humble fly!
  Nor think upon thy gleaming wing.

But when the skies have lost their hue,
  And sunny lights no longer play,
Oh then we see and bless thee too
  For sparkling o'er the dreary way.

Thus let me hope, when lost to me
  The lights that now my life illume,
Some milder joys may come, like thee,
  To cheer, if not to warm, the gloom!


[1] The lively and varying illumination, with which these fire-flies light
up the woods at night, gives quite an idea of enchantment.






TO THE LORD VISCOUNT FORBES.

FROM THE CITY OP WASHINGTON.


If former times had never left a trace
Of human frailty in their onward race,
Nor o'er their pathway written, as they ran,
One dark memorial of the crimes of man;
If every age, in new unconscious prime,
Rose, like a phenix, from the fires of time,
To wing its way unguided and alone,
The future smiling and the past unknown;
Then ardent man would to himself be new,
Earth at his foot and heaven within his view:
Well might the novice hope, the sanguine scheme
Of full perfection prompt his daring dream,
Ere cold experience, with her veteran lore,
Could tell him, fools had dreamt as much before.
But, tracing as we do, through age and clime,
The plans of virtue midst the deeds of crime,
The thinking follies and the reasoning rage
Of man, at once the idiot and the sage;
When still we see, through every varying frame
Of arts and polity, his course the same,
And know that ancient fools but died, to make
A space on earth for modern fools to take;
'Tis strange, how quickly we the past forget;
That Wisdom's self should not be tutored yet,
Nor tire of watching for the monstrous birth
Of pure perfection midst the sons of earth!

  Oh! nothing but that soul which God has given,
Could lead us thus to look on earth for heaven;
O'er dross without to shed the light within,
And dream of virtue while we see but sin.

  Even here, beside the proud Potowmac's stream,
Might sages still pursue the flattering theme
Of days to come, when man shall conquer fate,
Rise o'er the level of his mortal state,
Belie the monuments of frailty past,
And plant perfection in this world at last!
"Here," might they say, "shall power's divided reign
"Evince that patriots have not bled in vain.
"Here godlike liberty's herculean youth,
"Cradled in peace, and nurtured up by truth
"To full maturity of nerve and mind,
"Shall crush the giants that bestride mankind.
"Here shall religion's pure and balmy draught
"In form no more from cups of state be quaft,
"But flow for all, through nation, rank, and sect,
"Free as that heaven its tranquil waves reflect.
"Around the columns of the public shrine
"Shall growing arts their gradual wreath intwine,
"Nor breathe corruption from the flowering braid,
"Nor mine that fabric which they bloom to shade,
"No longer here shall Justice bound her view,
"Or wrong the many, while she rights the few;
"But take her range through all the social frame,
"Pure and pervading as that vital flame
"Which warms at once our best and meanest part,
"And thrills a hair while it expands a heart!"

  Oh golden dream! what soul that loves to scan
The bright disk rather than the dark of man,
That owns the good, while smarting with the ill,
And loves the world with all its frailty still,--
What ardent bosom does not spring to meet
The generous hope, with all that heavenly heat,
Which makes the soul unwilling to resign
The thoughts of growing, even on earth, divine!
Yes, dearest friend, I see thee glow to think
The chain of ages yet may boast a link
Of purer texture than the world has known,
And fit to bind us to a Godhead's throne.

  But, is it thus? doth even the glorious dream
Borrow from truth that dim, uncertain gleam,
Which tempts us still to give such fancies scope,
As shock not reason, while they nourish hope?
No, no, believe me, 'tis not so--even now,
While yet upon Columbia's rising brow
The showy smile of young presumption plays,
Her bloom is poisoned and her heart decays.
Even now, in dawn of life, her sickly breath
Burns with the taint of empires near their death;
And, like the nymphs of her own withering clime,
She's old in youth, she's blasted in her prime,[1]

  Already has the child of Gallia's school
The foul Philosophy that sins by rule,
With all her train of reasoning, damning arts,
Begot by brilliant heads on worthless hearts,
Like things that quicken after Nilus' flood,
The venomed birth of sunshine and of mud,--
Already has she poured her poison here
O'er every charm that makes existence dear;
Already blighted, with her blackening trace,
The opening bloom of every social grace,
And all those courtesies, that love to shoot
Round virtue's stem, the flowerets of her fruit.

  And, were these errors but the wanton tide
Of young luxuriance or unchastened pride;
The fervid follies and the faults of such
As wrongly feel, because they feel too much;
Then might experience make the fever less,
Nay, graft a virtue on each warm excess.
But no; 'tis heartless, speculative ill,
All youth's transgression with all age's chill;
The apathy of wrong, the bosom's ice,
A slow and cold stagnation into vice.

  Long has the love of gold, that meanest rage,
And latest folly of man's sinking age,
Which, rarely venturing in the van of life,
While nobler passions wage their heated strife,
Comes skulking last, with selfishness and fear,
And dies, collecting lumber in the rear,--
Long has it palsied every grasping hand
And greedy spirit through this bartering land;
Turned life to traffic, set the demon gold
So loose abroad that virtue's self is sold,
And conscience, truth, and honesty are made
To rise and fall, like other wares of trade.

  Already in this free, this virtuous state,
Which, Frenchmen tell us, was ordained by fate,
To show the world, what high perfection springs
From rabble senators, and merchant kings,--
Even here already patriots learn to steal
Their private perquisites from public weal,
And, guardians of the country's sacred fire,
Like Afric's priests, let out the flame for hire.
Those vaunted demagogues, who nobly rose
From England's debtors to be England's foes,
Who could their monarch in their purse forget,
And break allegiance, but to cancel debt,
Have proved at length, the mineral's tempting hue,
Which makes a patriot, can un-make him too.[2]
Oh! Freedom, Freedom, how I hate thy cant!
Not Eastern bombast, not the savage rant
Of purpled madmen, were they numbered all
From Roman Nero down to Russian Paul,
Could grate upon my ear so mean, so base,
As the rank jargon of that factious race,
Who, poor of heart and prodigal of words,
Formed to be slaves, yet struggling to be lords,
Strut forth, as patriots, from their negro-marts,
And shout for rights, with rapine in their hearts.
  Who can, with patience, for a moment see
The medley mass of pride and misery,
Of whips and charters, manacles and rights,
Of slaving blacks and democratic whites,
And all the piebald polity that reigns
In free confusion o'er Columbia's plains?
To think that man, thou just and gentle God!
Should stand before thee with a tyrant's rod
O'er creatures like himself, with souls from thee,
Yet dare to boast of perfect liberty;
Away, away--I'd rather hold my neck
By doubtful tenure from a sultan's beck,
In climes, where liberty has scarce been named,
Nor any right but that of ruling claimed,
Than thus to live, where bastard Freedom waves
Her fustian flag in mockery over slaves;
Where--motley laws admitting no degree
Betwixt the vilely slaved and madly free--
Alike the bondage and the license suit
The brute made ruler and the man made brute.

  But, while I thus, my friend, in flowerless song,
So feebly paint, what yet I feel so strong,
The ills, the vices of the land, where first
Those rebel fiends, that rack the world, were nurst,
Where treason's arm by royalty was nerved,
And Frenchmen learned to crush the throne they served--
Thou, calmly lulled in dreams of classic thought,
By bards illumined and by sages taught,
Pant'st to be all, upon this mortal scene,
That bard hath fancied or that sage hath been.
Why should I wake thee? why severely chase
The lovely forms of virtue and of grace,
That dwell before thee, like the pictures spread
By Spartan matrons round the genial bed,
Moulding thy fancy, and with gradual art
Brightening the young conceptions of thy heart.

  Forgive me, Forbes--and should the song destroy
One generous hope, one throb of social joy,
One high pulsation of the zeal for man,
Which few can feel, and bless that few who can,--
Oh! turn to him, beneath those kindred eyes
Thy talents open and thy virtues rise,
Forget where nature has been dark or dim,
And proudly study all her lights in him.
Yes, yes, in him the erring world forget,
And feel that man _may_ reach perfection yet.


[1] "What will be the old age of this government, if it is thus
early decrepit!" Such was the remark of Fauchet, the French minister at
Philadelphia, in that famous despatch to his government, which was
intercepted by one of our cruisers in the year 1794. This curious memorial
may be found in Porcupine's Works, vol. i. p. 279. It remains a striking
monument of republican intrigue on one side and republican profligacy on
the other; and I would recommend the perusal of it to every honest
politician, who may labor under a moment's delusion with respect to the
purity of American patriotism.

[2] See Porcupine's account of the Pennsylvania Insurrection in
1794. In short, see Porcupine's works throughout, for ample corroboration
of every sentiment which I have ventured to express. In saying this, I
refer less to the comments of that writer than to the occurrences which he
has related and the documents which he has preserved. Opinion may be
suspected of bias, but facts speak for themselves.






TO THOMAS HUME, ESQ., M. D.

FROM THE CITY OF WASHINGTON.


'Tis evening now; beneath the western star
Soft sighs the lover through his sweet cigar,
And fills the ears of some consenting she
With puffs and vows, with smoke and constancy.

The patriot, fresh from Freedom's councils come,
Now pleased retires to lash his slaves at home;
Or woo, perhaps, some black Aspasia's charms,
And dream of freedom in his bondsmaid's arms.

  In fancy now, beneath the twilight gloom,
Come, let me lead thee o'er this "second Rome!"[1]
Where tribunes rule, where dusky Davi bow,
And what was Goose-Creek once is Tiber now:[2]--
This embryo capital, where Fancy sees
Squares in morasses, obelisks in trees;
Which second-sighted seers, even now, adorn
With shrines unbuilt and heroes yet unborn,
Though naught but woods[3] and Jefferson they see,
Where streets should run and sages _ought_ to be.

  And look, how calmly in yon radiant wave,
The dying sun prepares his golden grave.
Oh mighty river! oh ye banks of shade!
Ye matchless scenes, in nature's morning made,
While still, in all the exuberance of prime,
She poured her wonders, lavishly sublime,
Nor yet had learned to stoop, with humbler care,
From grand to soft, from wonderful to fair;--
Say, were your towering hills, your boundless floods,
Your rich savannas and majestic woods,
Where bards should meditate and heroes rove,
And woman charm, and man deserve her love,--
Oh say, was world so bright, but born to grace
Its own half-organized, half-minded race[4]
Of weak barbarians, swarming o'er its breast,
Like vermin gendered on the lion's crest?
Were none but brutes to call that soil their home,
Where none but demigods should dare to roam?
Or worse, thou wondrous world! oh! doubly worse,
Did heaven design thy lordly land to nurse
The motley dregs of every distant clime,
Each blast of anarchy and taint of crime
Which Europe shakes from her perturbed sphere,
In full malignity to rankle here?

  But hold,--observe yon little mount of pines,
Where the breeze murmurs and the firefly shines.
There let thy fancy raise, in bold relief,
The sculptured image of that veteran chief[5]
Who lost the rebel's in the hero's name,
And climb'd o'er prostrate royalty to fame;
Beneath whose sword Columbia's patriot train
Cast off their monarch that their mob might reign.

  How shall we rank thee upon glory's page?
Thou more than soldier and just less than sage!
Of peace too fond to act the conqueror's part,
Too long in camps to learn a statesman's art,
Nature designed thee for a hero's mould,
But, ere she cast thee, let the stuff grow cold.

  While loftier souls command, nay, make their fate,
Thy fate made thee and forced thee to be great.
Yet Fortune, who so oft, so blindly sheds
Her brightest halo round the weakest heads,
Found _thee_ undazzled, tranquil as before,
Proud to be useful, scorning to be more;
Less moved by glory's than by duty's claim,
Renown the meed, but self-applause the aim;
All that thou _wert_ reflects less fame on thee,
Far less, than all thou didst _forbear to be_.
Nor yet the patriot of one land alone,--
For, thine's a name all nations claim their own;
And every shore, where breathed the good and brave,
Echoed the plaudits thy own country gave.

  Now look, my friend, where faint the moonlight falls
On yonder dome, and, in those princely halls,--
If thou canst hate, as sure that soul must hate,
Which loves the virtuous, and reveres the great,
If thou canst loathe and execrate with me
The poisoning drug of French philosophy,
That nauseous slaver of these frantic times,
With which false liberty dilutes her crimes,
If thou has got, within thy free-born breast,
One pulse that beats more proudly than the rest,
With honest scorn for that inglorious soul,
Which creeps and whines beneath a mob's control,
Which courts the rabble's smile, the rabble's nod,
And makes, like Egypt, every beast its god,
There, in those walls--but, burning tongue forbear!
Rank must be reverenced, even the rank that's there:
So here I pause--and now, dear Hume, we part:
But oft again, in frank exchange of heart,
Thus let us meet, and mingle converse dear
By Thames at home, or by Potowmac here.
O'er lake and marsh, through fevers and through fogs,
'Midst bears and yankees, democrats and frogs,
Thy foot shall follow me, thy heart and eyes
With me shall wonder, and with me despise.
While I, as oft, in fancy's dream shall rove,
With thee conversing, through that land I love,
Where, like the air that fans her fields of green,
Her freedom spreads, unfevered and serene;
And sovereign man can condescend to see
The throne and laws more sovereign still than he.


[1] "On the original location of the ground now allotted for the seat of
the Federal City [says Mr. Weld] the identical spot on which the capitol
now stands was called Rome. This anecdote is related by many as a certain
prognostic of the future magnificence of this city, which is to be, as it
were, a second Rome."--_Weld's Travels_, letter iv.

[2] A little stream runs through the city, which, with intolerable
affectation, they have styled the Tiber. It was originally called Goose-
Creek.

[3] "To be under the necessity of going through a deep wood for one or two
miles, perhaps, in order to see a next-door neighbor, and in the same
city, is a curious and I believe, a novel circumstance."--_Weld_, letter
iv.

The Federal City (if it, must be called a city), has hot been much
increased since Mr. Weld visited it.

[4] The picture which Buffon and De Pauw have drawn of the American
Indian, though very humiliating, is, as far as I can judge, much more
correct than the flattering representations which Mr. Jefferson has given
us. See the Notes on Virginia, where this gentleman endeavors to disprove
in general the opinion maintained so strongly by some philosophers that
nature (as Mr. Jefferson expresses it) _belittles_ her productions in
the western world.

[5] On a small hill near the capital there is to be an equestrian statue
of General Washington.






LINES WRITTEN ON LEAVING PHILADELPHIA.


Alone by the Schuylkill a wanderer roved,
  And bright were its flowery banks to his eye;
But far, very far were the friends that he loved,
  And he gazed on its flowery banks with a sigh.

Oh Nature, though blessed and bright are thy rays,
  O'er the brow of creation enchantingly thrown,
Yet faint are they all to the lustre that plays
  In a smile from the heart that is fondly our own.

Nor long did the soul of the stranger remain
 Unblest by the smile he had languished to meet;
Though scarce did he hope it would soothe him again,
  Till the threshold of home had been pressed by his feet.

But the lays of his boyhood had stolen to their ear,
And they loved what they knew of so humble a name;
And they told him, with flattery welcome and dear,
That they found in his heart something better than fame.

Nor did woman--oh woman! Whose form and whose soul
  Are the spell and the life of each path we pursue;
Whether sunned in the tropics or chilled at the pole,
  If woman be there, there is happiness too:--

Nor did she her enamoring magic deny,--
  That magic his heart had relinquished so long,--
Like eyes he had loved was _her_ eloquent eye,
  Like them did it soften and weep at his song.

Oh, blest be the tear, and in memory oft
  May its sparkle be shed o'er the wanderer's dream;
Thrice blest be that eye, and may passion as soft,
  As free from a pang, ever mellow its beam!

The stranger is gone--but he will not forget,
  When at home he shall talk of the toils he has known,
To tell, with a sigh, what endearments he met,
  As he strayed by the wave of the Schuylkill alone.






LINES WRITTEN AT THE COHOS, OR FALLS OF THE MOHAWK KIVER.[1]


    _Gia era in loco ove s'udia l'rimbombo
    Dell' acqua_. DANTE.


From rise of morn till set of sun
I've seen the mighty Mohawk run;
And as I markt the woods of pine
Along his mirror darkly shine,
Like tall and gloomy forms that pass
Before the wizard's midnight glass:
And as I viewed the hurrying pace
With which he ran his turbid race,
Rushing, alike untried and wild,
Through shades that frowned and flowers that smiled,
Flying by every green recess
That wooed him to its calm caress,
Yet, sometimes turning with the wind,
As if to leave one look behind,--
Oft have I thought, and thinking sighed,
How like to thee, thou restless tide,
May be the lot, the life of him
Who roams along thy water's brim;
Through what alternate wastes of woe
And flowers of joy my path may go;
How many a sheltered, calm retreat
May woo the while my weary feet,
While still pursuing, still unblest,
I wander on, nor dare to rest;
But, urgent as the doom that calls
Thy water to its destined falls,
I feel the world's bewildering force
Hurry my heart's devoted course
From lapse to lapse, till life be done,
And the spent current cease to run.

  One only prayer I dare to make,
As onward thus my course I take;--
Oh, be my falls as bright as thine!
May heaven's relenting rainbow shine
Upon the mist that circles me,
As soft as now it hangs o'er thee!


[1] There is a dreary and savage character in the country immediately
about these Falls, which is much more in harmony with the wildness of such
a scene than the cultivated lands in the neighborhood of Niagara.






SONG OF THE EVIL SPIRIT OF THE WOODS.[1]


    _qua via difficilis, quaque est via nulla_
    OVID _Metam. lib_ iii. v. 227.


Now the vapor, hot and damp,
Shed by day's expiring lamp,
Through the misty ether spreads
Every ill the white man dreads;
Fiery fever's thirsty thrill,
Fitful ague's shivering chill!

Hark! I hear the traveller's song,
As he winds the woods along;--
Christian, 'tis the song of fear;
Wolves are round thee, night is near,
And the wild thou dar'st to roam--
Think, 'twas once the Indian's home![2]

Hither, sprites, who love to harm,
Wheresoe'er you work your charm,
By the creeks, or by the brakes,
Where the pale witch feeds her snakes,
And the cayman[3] loves to creep,
Torpid, to his wintry sleep:
Where the bird of carrion flits,
And the shuddering murderer sits,[4]
Lone beneath a roof of blood;
While upon his poisoned food,
From the corpse of him he slew
Drops the chill and gory dew.

Hither bend ye, turn ye hither,
Eyes that blast and wings that wither
Cross the wandering Christian's way,
Lead him, ere the glimpse of day,
Many a mile of maddening error
Through the maze of night and terror,
Till the morn behold him lying
On the damp earth, pale and dying.
Mock him, when his eager sight
Seeks the cordial cottage-light;
Gleam then, like the lightning-bug,
Tempt him to the den that's dug
For the foul and famished brood
Of the she wolf, gaunt for blood;
Or, unto the dangerous pass
O'er the deep and dark morass,
Where the trembling Indian brings
Belts of porcelain, pipes, and rings,
Tributes, to be hung in air,
To the Fiend presiding there![5]

  Then, when night's long labor past,
Wildered, faint, he falls at last,
Sinking where the causeway's edge
Moulders in the slimy sedge,
There let every noxious thing
Trail its filth and fix its sting;
Let the bull-toad taint him over,
Round him let mosquitoes hover,
In his ears and eyeballs tingling,
With his blood their poison mingling,
Till, beneath the solar fires,
Rankling all, the wretch expires!


[1] The idea of this poem occurred to me in passing through the very
dreary wilderness between Batavia, a new settlement in the midst of the
woods, and the little village of Buffalo upon Lake Erie. This is the most
fatiguing part of the route, in travelling through the Genesee country to
Niagara.

[2] "The Five Confederated Nations (of Indians) were settled along the
banks of the Susquehannah and the adjacent country, until the year 1779,
when General Sullivan, with an army of 4000 men drove them from their
country to Niagara, where, being obliged to live on salted provisions, to
which they were unaccustomed, great numbers of them died. Two hundred of
them, it is said, were buried in one grave, where they had encamped."--
_Morse's American Geography_.

[3] The alligator, who is supposed to lie in a torpid state all the
winter, in the bank of some creek or pond, having previously swallowed a
large number of pine-knots, which are his only sustenance during the time.

[4] This was the mode of punishment for murder (as Charlevoix tells us)
among the Hurons. "They laid the dead body upon poles at the top of a
cabin, and the murderer was obliged to remain several days together, and
to receive all that dropped from the carcass, not only on himself but on
his food."

[5] "We find also collars of porcelain, tobacco, ears of maize, skins,
etc., by the side of difficult and dangerous ways, on rocks, or by the
side of the falls; and these are so many offerings made to the spirits
which preside in these places."--See _Charlevoix's Letter on the
Traditions and the Religion of the Savages of Canada_.

Father Hennepin too mentions this ceremony; he also says, "We took notice
of one barbarian, who made a kind of sacrifice upon an oak at the Cascade
of St. Anthony of Padua upon the river Mississippi."--See _Hennepin's
Voyage into North America_.






TO THE HONORABLE W. R. SPENCER.

FROM BUFFALO, UPON LAKE ERIE.


    _nec venit ad duros musa vocata Getas_.
    OVID. _ex Ponto, lib. 1. ep. 5_.


Thou oft hast told me of the happy hours
Enjoyed by thee in fair Italia's bowers,
Where, lingering yet, the ghost of ancient wit
Midst modern monks profanely dares to flit.
And pagan spirits, by the Pope unlaid,
Haunt every stream and sing through every shade.
There still the bard who (if his numbers be
His tongue's light echo) must have talked like thee,--
The courtly bard, from whom thy mind has caught
Those playful, sunshine holidays of thought,
In which the spirit baskingly reclines,
Bright without effort, resting while it shines,--
There still he roves, and laughing loves to see
How modern priests with ancient rakes agree:
How, 'neath the cowl, the festal garland shines,
And Love still finds a niche in Christian shrines.

  There still, too, roam those other souls of song,
With whom thy spirit hath communed so long,
That, quick as light, their rarest gems of thought,
By Memory's magic to thy lip are brought.
But here, alas! by Erie's stormy lake,
As, far from such bright haunts my course I take,
No proud remembrance o'er the fancy plays,
No classic dream, no star of other days
Hath left that visionary light behind,
That lingering radiance of immortal mind,
Which gilds and hallows even the rudest scene,
The humblest shed, where Genius once has been!

  All that creation's varying mass assumes
Of grand or lovely, here aspires and blooms;
Bold rise the mountains, rich the gardens glow,
Bright lakes expand, and conquering[1] rivers flow;
But mind, immortal mind, without whose ray,
This world's a wilderness and man but clay,
Mind, mind alone, in barren, still repose,
Nor blooms, nor rises, nor expands, nor flows.
Take Christians, Mohawks, democrats, and all
From the rude wigwam to the congress-hall,
From man the savage, whether slaved or free,
To man the civilized, less tame than he,--
'Tis one dull chaos, one unfertile strife
Betwixt half-polished and half-barbarous life;
Where every ill the ancient world could brew
Is mixt with every grossness of the new;
Where all corrupts, though little can entice,
And naught is known of luxury but its vice!

  Is this the region then, is this the clime
For soaring fancies? for those dreams sublime,
Which all their miracles of light reveal
To heads that meditate and hearts that feel?
Alas! not so--the Muse of Nature lights
Her glories round; she scales the mountain heights,
And roams the forests; every wondrous spot
Burns with her step, yet man regards it not.
She whispers round, her words are in the air,
But lost, unheard, they linger freezing there,[2]
Without one breath of soul, divinely strong,
One ray of mind to thaw them into song.

  Yet, yet forgive me, oh ye sacred few,
Whom late by Delaware's green banks I knew;
Whom, known and loved through many a social eve,
'Twas bliss to live with, and 'twas pain to leave.[3]
Not with more joy the lonely exile scanned
The writing traced upon the desert's sand,
Where his lone heart but little hoped to find
One trace of life, one stamp of human kind,
Than did I hail the pure, the enlightened zeal,
The strength to reason and the warmth to feel,
The manly polish and the illumined taste,
Which,--mid the melancholy, heartless waste
My foot has traversed,--oh you sacred few!
I found by Delaware's green banks with you.

  Long may you loathe the Gallic dross that runs
Through your fair country and corrupts its sons;
Long love the arts, the glories which adorn
Those fields of freedom, where your sires were born.
Oh! if America can yet be great,
If neither chained by choice, nor doomed by fate
To the mob-mania which imbrutes her now,
She yet can raise the crowned, yet civic brow
Of single majesty,--can add the grace
Of Rank's rich capital to Freedom's base,
Nor fear the mighty shaft will feebler prove
For the fair ornament that flowers above;--
If yet released from all that pedant throng,
So vain of error and so pledged to wrong,
Who hourly teach her, like themselves, to hide
Weakness in vaunt and barrenness in pride,
She yet can rise, can wreathe the Attic charms
Of soft refinement round the pomp of arms,
And see her poets flash the fires of song,
To light her warriors' thunderbolts along;--
It is to you, to souls that favoring heaven
Has made like yours, the glorious task is given:--
Oh! but for _such_, Columbia's days were done;
Rank without ripeness, quickened without sun,
Crude at the surface, rotten at the core,
Her fruits would fall, before her spring were o'er.

  Believe me, Spencer, while I winged the hours
Where Schuylkill winds his way through banks of flowers,
Though few the days, the happy evenings few;
So warm with heart, so rich with mind they flew,
That my charmed soul forgot its wish to roam,
And rested there, as in a dream of home.
And looks I met, like looks I'd loved before,
And voices too, which, as they trembled o'er
The chord of memory, found full many a tone
Of kindness there in concord with their own.
Yes,--we had nights of that communion free,
That flow of heart, which I have known with thee
So oft, so warmly; nights of mirth and mind,

Of whims that taught, and follies that refined.
When shall we both renew them? when, restored
To the gay feast and intellectual board,
Shall I once more enjoy with thee and thine
Those whims that teach, those follies that refine?
Even now, as, wandering upon Erie's shore,
I hear Niagara's distant cataract roar,
I sigh for home,--alas! these weary feet
Have many a mile to journey, ere we meet.


[1] This epithet was suggested by Charlevoix's striking description of the
confluence of the Missouri with the Mississippi.

[2] Alluding to the fanciful notion of "words congealed in northern air."

[3] In the society of Mr. Dennie and his friends, at Philadelphia, I
passed the few agreeable moments which my tour through the States afforded
me. Mr. Dennie has succeeded in diffusing through this cultivated little
circle that love for good literature and sound politics which he feels so
zealously himself, and which is so very rarely the characteristic of his
countrymen. They will not, I trust, accuse me of illiberality for the
picture which I have given of the ignorance and corruption that surround
them. If I did not hate, as I ought, the rabble to which they are opposed,
I could not value, as I do, the spirit with which they defy it; and in
learning from them what Americans _can be_, I but see with the more
indignation what Americans _are_.






BALLAD STANZAS.

I knew by the smoke, that so gracefully curled
  Above the green elms, that a cottage was near.
And I said, "If there's peace to be found in the world,
  "A heart that was humble might hope for it here!"
It was noon, and on flowers that languished around
  In silence reposed the voluptuous bee;
Every leaf was at rest, and I heard not a sound
  But the woodpecker tapping the hollow beech-tree.

And, "Here in this lone little wood," I exclaimed,
  "With a maid who was lovely to soul and to eye,
"Who would blush when I praised her, and weep if I blamed,
  How blest could I live, and how calm could I die!

"By the shade of yon sumach, whose red berry dips
  "In the gush of the fountain, how sweet to recline,
"And to know that I sighed upon innocent lips,
  "Which had never been sighed on by any but mine!"






A CANADIAN BOAT SONG.

WRITTEN ON THE RIVER ST. LAWRENCE.[1]


    _et remigem cantus hortatur_.
    QUINTILIAN.


Faintly as tolls the evening chime
Our voices keep tune and our oars keep time.
Soon as the woods on shore look dim,
We'll sing at St. Ann's our parting hymn.[2]
Row, brothers, row, the stream runs fast,
The Rapids are near and the daylight's past.

  Why should we yet our sail unfurl?
There is not a breath the blue wave to curl,
But, when the wind blows off the shore,
Oh! sweetly we'll rest our weary oar.
Blow, breezes, blow, the stream runs fast,
The Rapids are near and the daylight's past.

  Utawas' tide! this trembling moon
Shall see us float over thy surges soon.
Saint of this green isle! hear our prayers,
Oh, grant us cool heavens and favoring airs.
Blow, breezes, blow, the stream runs fast,
The Rapids are near and the daylight's past.


[1] I wrote these words to an air which our boatmen sung to us frequently.
The wind was so unfavorable that they were obliged to row all the way, and
we were five days in descending the river from Kingston to Montreal,
exposed to an intense sun during the day, and at night forced to take
shelter from the dews in any miserable hut upon the banks that would
receive us. But the magnificent scenery of the St. Lawrence repays all
such difficulties.

[2] "At the Rapid of St. Ann they are obliged to take out part, if not the
whole, of their lading. It is from this spot Canadians consider they take
their departure, as it possesses the last church on the island, which is
dedicated to the tutelar saint of voyagers."--_Mackenzie, General History
of the Fur Trade_.






TO THE LADY CHARLOTTE RAWDON.

FROM THE BANKS OF THE ST. LAWRENCE.


Not many months have now been dreamed away
Since yonder sun, beneath whose evening ray
Our boat glides swiftly past these wooded shores,
Saw me where Trent his mazy current pours,
And Donington's old oaks, to every breeze,
Whisper the tale of by-gone centuries;--
Those oaks, to me as sacred as the groves,
Beneath whose shade the pious Persian roves,
And hears the spirit-voice of sire, or chief,
Or loved mistress, sigh in every leaf.
There, oft, dear Lady, while thy lip hath sung
My own unpolished lays, how proud I've hung
On every tuneful accent! proud to feel.
That notes like mine should have the fate to steal,
As o'er thy hallowing lip they sighed along.
Such breath of passion and such soul of song.
Yes,--I have wondered, like some peasant boy
Who sings, on Sabbath-eve, his strains of joy,
And when he hears the wild, untutored note
Back to his ear on softening echoes float,
Believes it still some answering spirit's tone,
And thinks it all too sweet to be his own!

  I dreamt not then that, ere the rolling year
Had filled its circle, I should wander here
In musing awe; should tread this wondrous world,
See all its store of inland waters hurled
In one vast volume down Niagara's steep,
Or calm behold them, in transparent sleep,
Where the blue hills of old Toronto shed
Their evening shadows o'er Ontario's bed;
Should trace the grand Cadaraqui, and glide
Down the white rapids of his lordly tide
Through massy woods, mid islets flowering fair,
And blooming glades, where the first sinful pair
For consolation might have weeping trod,
When banished from the garden of their God,
Oh, Lady! these are miracles, which man,
Caged in the bounds of Europe's pigmy span,
Can scarcely dream of,--which his eye must see
To know how wonderful this world can be!

  But lo,--the last tints of the west decline,
And night falls dewy o'er these banks of pine.
Among the reeds, in which our idle boat
Is rocked to rest, the wind's complaining note
Dies like a half-breathed whispering of flutes;
Along the wave the gleaming porpoise shoots,
And I can trace him, like a watery star,[1]
Down the steep current, till he fades afar
Amid the foaming breakers' silvery light.
Where yon rough rapids sparkle through the night.
Here, as along this shadowy bank I stray,
And the smooth glass-snake,[2] glid-o'er my way,
Shows the dim moonlight through his scaly form,
Fancy, with all the scene's enchantment warm,
Hears in the murmur of the nightly breeze
Some Indian Spirit warble words like these:--

  From the land beyond the sea,
  Whither happy spirits flee;
  Where, transformed to sacred doves,[3]
  Many a blessed Indian roves
  Through the air on wing, as white
  As those wondrous stones of light,[4]
  Which the eye of morning counts
  On the Apalachian mounts,--
  Hither oft my flight I take
  Over Huron's lucid lake,
  Where the wave, as clear as dew,
  Sleeps beneath the light canoe,
  Which, reflected, floating there,
  Looks as if it hung in air.

  Then, when I have strayed a while
Through the Manataulin isle,[5]
Breathing all its holy bloom,
Swift I mount me on the plume
Of my Wakon-Bird,[6] and fly
Where, beneath a burning sky,
O'er the bed of Erie's lake
Slumbers many a water-snake,
Wrapt within the web of leaves,
Which the water-lily weaves.[7]
Next I chase the floweret-king
Through his rosy realm of spring;
See him now, while diamond hues
Soft his neck and wings suffuse,
In the leafy chalice sink,
Thirsting for his balmy drink;
Now behold him all on fire,
Lovely in his looks of ire,
Breaking every infant stem,
Scattering every velvet gem,
Where his little tyrant lip
Had not found enough to sip.

  Then my playful hand I steep
Where the gold-thread loves to creep,
Cull from thence a tangled wreath,
Words of magic round it breathe,
And the sunny chaplet spread
O'er the sleeping fly-bird's head,
Till, with dreams of honey blest,
Haunted, in his downy nest,
By the garden's fairest spells,
Dewy buds and fragrant bells,
Fancy all his soul embowers
In the fly-bird's heaven of flowers.

  Oft, when hoar and silvery flakes
Melt along the ruffled lakes,
When the gray moose sheds his horns,
When the track, at evening, warns
Weary hunters of the way
To the wigwam's cheering ray,
Then, aloft through freezing air,
With the snow-bird soft and fair
As the fleece that heaven flings
O'er his little pearly wings,
Light above the rocks I play,
Where Niagara's starry spray,
Frozen on the cliff, appears
Like a giant's starting tears.
There, amid the island-sedge,
Just upon the cataract's edge,
Where the foot of living man
Never trod since time began,
Lone I sit, at close of day,
While, beneath the golden ray,
Icy columns gleam below,
Feathered round with falling snow,
And an arch of glory springs,
Sparkling as the chain of rings
Round the neck of virgins hung,--
Virgins, who have wandered young
O'er the waters of the west
To the land where spirits rest!

Thus have I charmed, with visionary lay,
The lonely moments of the night away;
And now, fresh daylight o'er the water beams!
Once more, embarked upon the glittering streams,
Our boat flies light along the leafy shore,
Shooting the falls, without a dip of oar
Or breath of zephyr, like the mystic bark
The poet saw, in dreams divinely dark,
Borne, without sails, along the dusky flood,
While on its deck a pilot angel stood,
And, with his wings of living light unfurled,
Coasted the dim shores of another world!

Yet, oh! believe me, mid this mingled maze
Of Nature's beauties, where the fancy strays
From charm to charm, where every floweret's hue
Hath something strange, and every leaf is new,--
I never feel a joy so pure and still
So inly felt, as when some brook or hill,
Or veteran oak, like those remembered well,
Some mountain echo or some wild-flower's smell,
(For, who can say by what small fairy ties
The memory clings to pleasure as it flies?)
Reminds my heart of many a silvan dream
I once indulged by Trent's inspiring stream;
Of all my sunny morns and moonlight nights
On Donington's green lawns and breezy heights.

Whether I trace the tranquil moments o'er
When I have seen thee cull the fruits of lore,
With him, the polished warrior, by thy side,
A sister's idol and a nation's pride!
When thou hast read of heroes, trophied high
In ancient fame, and I have seen thine eye
Turn to the living hero, while it read,
For pure and brightening comments on the dead;--
Or whether memory to my mind recalls
The festal grandeur of those lordly halls,
When guests have met around the sparkling board,
And welcome warmed the cup that luxury poured;
When the bright future Star of England's throne,
With magic smile, hath o'er the banquet shone,
Winning respect, nor claiming what he won,
But tempering greatness, like an evening sun
Whose light the eye can tranquilly admire,
Radiant, but mild, all softness, yet all fire;--
Whatever hue my recollections take,
Even the regret, the very pain they wake
Is mixt with happiness;--but, ah! no more--
Lady! adieu--my heart has lingered o'er
Those vanished times, till all that round me lies,
Stream, banks, and bowers have faded on my eyes!


[1] Anburey, in his Travels, has noticed this shooting illumination which
porpoises diffuse at night through the river St. Lawrence,--Vol. i. p. 29.

[2] The glass-snake is brittle and transparent.

[3] "The departed spirit goes into the Country of Souls, where, according
to some, it is transformed into a dove."--_Charlevoix upon the
Traditions and the Religion of the Savages of Canada_.

[4] "The mountains appeared to be sprinkled with white stones, which
glistened in the sun, and were called by the Indians manetoe aseniah, or
spirit-stones."--_Mackenzie's Journal_.

[5] Manataulin signifies a Place of Spirits, and this island in Lake Huron
is held sacred by the Indians.

[6] "The Wakon-Bird, which probably is of the same species with the bird
of Paradise, receives its name from the ideas the Indians have of its
superior excellence; the Wakon-Bird being, in their language, the Bird of
the Great Spirit."--_Morse_.

[7] The islands of Lake Erie are surrounded to a considerable distance by
the large pond-lily, whose leaves spread thickly over the surface of the
lake, and form a kind of bed for the water-snakes in summer.






IMPROMPTU.

AFTER A VISIT TO MRS. ----, OF MONTREAL.


'Twas but for a moment--and yet in that time
  She crowded the impressions of many an hour:
Her eye had a glow, like the sun of her clime,
  Which waked every feeling at once into flower.

Oh! could we have borrowed from Time but a day,
  To renew such impressions again and again,
The things we should look and imagine and say
  Would be worth all the life we had wasted till then.

What we had not the leisure or language to speak,
  We should find some more spiritual mode of revealing,
And, between us, should feel just as much in a week
  As others would take a millennium in feeling.






WRITTEN

ON PASSING DEADMAN'S ISLAND,
IN THE GULF OF ST. LAWRENCE,[1]
LATE IN THE EVENING, SEPTEMBER, 1804.

See you, beneath yon cloud so dark,
Fast gliding along a gloomy bark?
Her sails are full,--though the wind is still,
And there blows not a breath her sails to fill!

Say, what doth that vessel of darkness bear?
The silent calm of the grave is there,
Save now and again a death-knell rung,
And the flap of the sails with night-fog hung.

There lieth a wreck on the dismal shore
Of cold and pitiless Labrador;
Where, under the moon, upon mounts of frost,
Full many a mariner's bones are tost.

Yon shadowy bark hath been to that wreck,
And the dim blue fire, that lights her deck,
Doth play on as pale and livid a crew,
As ever yet drank the churchyard dew.

To Deadman's Isle, in the eye of the blast,
To Deadman's Isle, she speeds her fast;
By skeleton shapes her sails are furled,
And the hand that steers is not of this world!

Oh! hurry thee on-oh! hurry thee on,
Thou terrible bark, ere the night be gone,
Nor let morning look on so foul a sight
As would blanch for ever her rosy light!

[1]  This is one of the Magdalen Islands, and, singularly enough, is the
property of Sir Isaac Coffin. The above lines were suggested by a
superstition very common among sailors, who called this ghost-ship, I
think, "The Flying Dutchman."






TO THE BOSTON FRIGATE, ON LEAVING HALIFAX FOR ENGLAND,[1]

OCTOBER, 1804.


With triumph, this morning, oh Boston! I hail
The stir of thy deck and the spread of thy sail,
For they tell me I soon shall be wafted, in thee,
To the flourishing isle of the brave and the free,
And that chill Nova-Scotia's unpromising strand
Is the last I shall tread of American land.
Well--peace to the land! may her sons know, at length,
That in high-minded honor lies liberty's strength,
That though man be as free as the fetterless wind,
As the wantonest air that the north can unbind,
Yet, if health do not temper and sweeten the blast,
If no harvest of mind ever sprung where it past,
Then unblest is such freedom, and baleful its might,--
Free only to ruin, and strong but to blight!

Farewell to the few I have left with regret:
May they sometimes recall, what I cannot forget;
The delight of those evenings,--too brief a delight!
When in converse and song we have stolen on the night;
When they've asked me the manners, the mind, or the mien,
Of some bard I had known or some chief I had seen,
Whose glory, though distant, they long had adored,
Whose name had oft hallowed the wine-cup they poured;
And still as, with sympathy humble but true,
I have told of each bright son of fame all I knew,
They have listened, and sighed that the powerful stream
Of America's empire should pass like a dream,
Without leaving one relic of genius, to say,
How sublime was the tide which had vanished away!
Farewell to the few--though we never may meet
On this planet again, it is soothing and sweet
To think that, whenever my song or my name
Shall recur to their ear, they'll recall me the same
I have been to them now, young, unthoughtful, and blest,
Ere hope had deceived me or sorrow deprest.

But, Douglas! while thus I recall to my mind
The elect of the land we shall soon leave behind,
I can read in the weather-wise glance of thine eye
As it follows the rack flitting over the sky,
That the faint coming breeze would be fair for our flight,
And shall steal us away, ere the falling of night.
Dear Douglas! thou knowest, with thee by my side,
With thy friendship to soothe me, thy courage to guide,
There is not a bleak isle in those summerless seas,
Where the day comes in darkness, or shines but to freeze,
Not a tract of the line, not a barbarous shore,
That I could not with patience, with pleasure explore!
Oh think then how gladly I follow thee now,
When Hope smooths the billowy path of our prow,
And each prosperous sigh of the west-springing wind
Takes me nearer the home where my heart is inshrined;
Where the smile of a father shall meet me again,
And the tears of a mother turn bliss into pain;
Where the kind voice of sisters shall steal to my heart,
And ask it, in sighs, how we ever could part?--

But see!--the bent top sails are ready to swell--
To the boat--I am with thee--Columbia, farewell!


[1] Commanded by Captain J. E. Douglas, with whom I returned to England,
and to whom I am indebted for many, many kindnesses.








IRISH MELODIES




DEDICATION

TO THE MARCHIONESS DOWAGER OF DONEGAL.


It is now many years since, in, a Letter prefixed to the Third Number of
the Irish Melodies, I had the pleasure of inscribing the Poems of that
work to your Ladyship, as to one whose character reflected honor on the
country to which they relate, and whose friendship had long been the pride
and happiness of their Author. With the same feelings of affection and
respect, confirmed if not increased by the experience of every succeeding
year, I now place those Poems in their present new form under your
protection, and am,

With perfect Sincerity,
Your Ladyship's ever attached friend,

THOMAS MOORE.




PREFACE.


Though an edition of the Poetry of the Irish Melodies, separate from the
Music, has long been called for, yet, having, for many reasons, a strong
objection to this sort of divorce, I should with difficulty have consented
to a disunion of the words from the airs, had it depended solely upon me
to keep them quietly and indissolubly together. But, besides the various
shapes in which these, as well as my other lyrical writings, have been
published throughout America, they are included, of course, in all the
editions of my works printed on the Continent, and have also appeared, in
a volume full of typographical errors, in Dublin. I have therefore readily
acceded to the wish expressed by the Proprietor of the Irish Melodies, for
a revised and complete edition of the poetry of the Work, though well
aware that my verses must lose even more than the "_animae dimidium_" in
being detached from the beautiful airs to which it was their good fortune
to be associated.






IRISH MELODIES






GO WHERE GLORY WAITS THEE.


Go where glory waits thee,
But while fame elates thee,
  Oh! still remember me.
When the praise thou meetest
To thine ear is sweetest,
  Oh! then remember me.
Other arms may press thee,
Dearer friends caress thee,
All the joys that bless thee,
  Sweeter far may be;
But when friends are nearest,
And when joys are dearest,
  Oh! then remember me!

When, at eve, thou rovest
By the star thou lovest,
  Oh! then remember me.
Think, when home returning,
Bright we've seen it burning,
  Oh! thus remember me.
Oft as summer closes,
When thine eye reposes
On its lingering roses,
  Once so loved by thee,
Think of her who wove them,
Her who made thee love them,
  Oh! then, remember me.

When, around thee dying,
Autumn leaves are lying,
  Oh! then remember me.
And, at night, when gazing
On the gay hearth blazing,
  Oh! still remember me.
Then should music, stealing
All the soul of feeling,
To thy heart appealing,
  Draw one tear from thee;
Then let memory bring thee
Strains I used to sing thee,--
  Oh! then remember me.






WAR SONG.

REMEMBER THE GLORIES OF BRIEN THE BRAVE.[1]


Remember the glories of Brien the brave,
  Tho' the days of the hero are o'er;
Tho' lost to Mononia and cold in the grave,[2]
  He returns to Kinkora no more.[3]
That star of the field, which so often hath poured
  Its beam on the battle, is set;
But enough of its glory remains on each sword,
  To light us to victory yet.

Mononia! when Nature embellished the tint
  Of thy fields, and thy mountains so fair,
Did she ever intend that a tyrant should print
  The footstep of slavery there?
No! Freedom, whose smile we shall never resign,
  Go, tell our invaders, the Danes,
That 'tis sweeter to bleed for an age at thy shrine,
  Than to sleep but a moment in chains.

Forget not our wounded companions, who stood[4]
  In the day of distress by our side;
While the moss of the valley grew red with their blood,
  They stirred not, but conquered and died.
That sun which now blesses our arms with his light,
  Saw them fall upon Ossory's plain;--
Oh! let him not blush, when he leaves us to-night,
  To find that they fell there in vain.


[1] Brien Boromhe, the great monarch of Ireland, who was killed at the
battle of Clontarf, in the beginning of the 11th century, after having
defeated the Danes in twenty-five engagements.

[2] Munster.

[3] The palace of Brien.

[4] This alludes to an interesting circumstance related of the Dalgais,
the favorite troops of Brien, when they were interrupted in their return
from the battle of Clontarf, by Fitzpatrick, prince of Ossory. The wounded
men entreated that they might be allowed to fight with the rest,--"_Let
stakes_[they said] _be stuck in the ground, and suffer each of us to be
tied to and supported by one of these stakes, to be placed in his rank by
the side of a sound man_." "Between seven and eight hundred men (adds
O'Halloran) pale, emaciated, and supported in this manner, appeared mixed
with the foremost of the troops;--never was such another sight
exhibited."--_"History of Ireland_," book xii. chap i.






ERIN! THE TEAR AND THE SMILE IN THINE EYES.


Erin, the tear and the smile in thine eyes,
Blend like the rainbow that hangs in thy skies!
  Shining through sorrow's stream,
  Saddening through pleasure's beam,
  Thy suns with doubtful gleam,
    Weep while they rise.

Erin, thy silent tear never shall cease,
Erin, thy languid smile ne'er shall increase,
  Till, like the rainbow's light,
  Thy various tints unite,
  And form in heaven's sight
    One arch of peace!






OH! BREATHE NOT HIS NAME.


Oh! breathe not his name, let it sleep in the shade,
Where cold and unhonored his relics are laid:
Sad, silent, and dark, be the tears that we shed,
As the night-dew that falls on the grass o'er his head.
But the night-dew that falls, tho' in silence it weeps,
Shall brighten with verdure the grave where he sleeps;
And the tear that we shed, tho' in secret it rolls,
Shall long keep his memory green in our souls.






WHEN HE, WHO ADORES THEE.


When he, who adores thee, has left but the name
  Of his fault and his sorrows behind,
Oh! say wilt thou weep, when they darken the fame
  Of a life that for thee was resigned?
Yes, weep, and however my foes may condemn,
  Thy tears shall efface their decree;
For Heaven can witness, tho' guilty to them,
  I have been but too faithful to thee.

With thee were the dreams of my earliest love;
  Every thought of my reason was thine;
In my last humble prayer to the Spirit above,
  Thy name shall be mingled with mine.
Oh! blest are the lovers and friend who shall live
  The days of thy glory to see;
But the next dearest blessing that Heaven can give
  Is the pride of thus dying for thee.






THE HARP THAT ONCE THRO' TARA'S HALLS.


The harp that once thro' Tara's halls
  The soul of music shed,
Now hangs as mute on Tara's walls.
  As if that soul were fled.--
So sleeps the pride of former days,
  So glory's thrill is o'er,
And hearts, that once beat high for praise,
  Now feel that pulse no more.

No more to chiefs and ladies bright
  The harp of Tara swells;
The chord alone, that breaks at night,
  Its tale of ruin tells.
Thus Freedom now so seldom wakes,
  The only throbs she gives,
Is when some heart indignant breaks.
  To show that still she lives.






FLY NOT YET.


Fly not yet, 'tis just the hour,
When pleasure, like the midnight flower
That scorns the eye of vulgar light,
Begins to bloom for sons of night,
  And maids who love the moon.
'Twas but to bless these hours of shade
That beauty and the moon were made;
'Tis then their soft attractions glowing
Set the tides and goblets flowing.
  Oh! stay,--Oh! stay,--
Joy so seldom weaves a chain
Like this to-night, and oh, 'tis pain
  To break its links so soon.

Fly not yet, the fount that played
In times of old through Ammon's shade,
Though icy cold by day it ran,
Yet still, like souls of mirth, began
  To burn when night was near.
And thus, should woman's heart and looks,
At noon be cold as winter brooks,
Nor kindle till the night, returning,
Brings their genial hour for burning.
  Oh! stay,--Oh! stay,--
When did morning ever break,
And find such beaming eyes awake
  As those that sparkle here?






OH! THINK NOT MY SPIRITS ARE ALWAYS AS LIGHT.


Oh! think not my spirits are always as light,
  And as free from a pang as they seem to you now;
Nor expect that the heart-beaming smile of to-night
  Will return with to morrow to brighten my brow.
No!--life is a waste of wearisome hours,
  Which seldom the rose of enjoyment adorns;
And the heart that is soonest awake to the flowers,
  Is always the first to be touched by the thorns.
But send round the bowl, and be happy awhile--
  May we never meet worse, in our pilgrimage here,
Than the tear that enjoyment may gild with a smile,
  And the smile that compassion can turn to a tear.

The thread of our life would be dark, Heaven knows!
  If it were not with friendship and love intertwined:
And I care not how soon I may sink to repose,
  When these blessings shall cease to be dear to my mind.
But they who have loved the fondest, the purest.
  Too often have wept o'er the dream they believed;
And the heart that has slumbered in friendship, securest,
  Is happy indeed if 'twas never deceived.
But send round the bowl; while a relic of truth
  Is in man or in woman, this prayer shall be mine,--
That the sunshine of love may illumine our youth,
  And the moonlight of friendship console our decline.






THO' THE LAST GLIMPSE OF ERIN WITH SORROW I SEE.


Tho' the last glimpse of Erin with sorrow I see,
Yet wherever thou art shall seem Erin to me;
In exile thy bosom shall still be my home,
And thine eyes make my climate wherever we room.

To the gloom of some desert or cold rocky shore,
Where the eye of the stranger can haunt us no more,
I will fly with my Coulin, and think the rough wind
Less rude than the foes we leave frowning behind.

And I'll gaze on thy gold hair as graceful it wreathes;
And hang o'er thy soft harp, as wildly it breathes;
Nor dread that the cold-hearted Saxon will tear
One chord from that harp, or one lock from that hair.[1]


[1] "In the twenty-eighth year of the reign of Henry VIII, an Act was made
respecting the habits, and dress in general, of the Irish, whereby all
persons were restrained from being shorn or shaven above the ears, or from
wearing Glibbes, or _Coulins_ (long locks), on their heads, or hair on
their upper lip, called _Crommeal_. On this occasion a song was written by
one of our bards, in which an Irish virgin is made to give the preference
to her dear _Coulin_ (or the youth with the flowing locks) to all
strangers (by which the English were meant), or those who wore their
habits. Of this song, the air alone has reached us, and is universally
admired."--"_Walker's "Historical Memoirs of Irish Bards_," p. 184. Mr.
Walker informs us also, that, about the same period, there were some harsh
measures taken against the Irish Minstrels.






RICH AND RARE WERE THE GEMS SHE WORE.[1]


Rich and rare were the gems she wore,
And a bright gold ring on her wand she bore;
But oh! her beauty was far beyond
Her sparkling gems, or snow-white wand.

"Lady! dost thou not fear, to stray,
"So lone and lovely through this bleak way?
"Are Erin's sons so good or so cold,
"As not to be tempted by woman or gold?"

"Sir Knight! I feel not the least alarm,
"No son of Erin will offer me harm:--
"For though they love woman and golden store,
"Sir Knight! they love honor and virtue more!"

On she went and her maiden smile
In safety lighted her round the green isle;
And blest for ever is she who relied
Upon Erin's honor, and Erin's pride.


[1] This ballad is founded upon the following anecdote:--"The people were
inspired with such a spirit of honor, virtue, and religion, by the great
example of Brien, and by his excellent administration, that, as a proof of
it, we are informed that a young lady of great beauty, adorned with jewels
and a costly dress, undertook a journey alone, from one end of the kingdom
to the other, with a wand only in her hand, at the top of which was a ring
of exceeding great value; and such an impression had the laws and
government of this Monarch made on the minds of all the people, that no
attempt was made upon her honor, nor was she robbed of her clothes or
jewels."--_Warner's "History of Ireland_," vol i, book x.






AS A BEAM O'ER THE FACE OF THE WATERS MAY GLOW.


As a beam o'er the face of the waters may glow
While the tide runs in darkness and coldness below,
So the cheek may be tinged with a warm sunny smile,
Though the cold heart to ruin runs darkly the while.

One fatal remembrance, one sorrow that throws
Its bleak shade alike o'er our joys and our woes.
To which life nothing darker or brighter can bring
For which joy has no balm and affliction no sting--

Oh! this thought in the midst of enjoyment will stay,
Like a dead, leafless branch in the summer's bright ray;
The beams of the warm sun play round it in vain,
It may smile in his light, but it blooms not again.






THE MEETING OF THE WATERS.[1]


There is not in the wide world a valley so sweet
As that vale in whose bosom the bright waters meet;[2]
Oh! the last rays of feeling and life must depart,
Ere the bloom of that valley shall fade from my heart.

Yet it _was_ not that nature had shed o'er the scene
Her purest of crystal and brightest of green;
'Twas _not_ her soft magic of streamlet or hill,
Oh! no,--it was something more exquisite still.

'Twas that friends, the beloved of my bosom, were near,
Who made every dear scene of enchantment more dear,
And who felt how the best charms of nature improve,
When we see them reflected from looks that we love.

Sweet vale of Avoca! how calm could I rest
In thy bosom of shade, with the friends I love best.
Where the storms that we feel in this cold world should cease,
And our hearts, like thy waters, be mingled in peace.


[1] "The Meeting of the Waters" forms a part of that beautiful scenery
which lies between Rathdrum and Arklow, in the county of Wicklow, and
these lines were suggested by a visit to this romantic spot, in the summer
of the year 1807.

[2] The rivers Avon and Avoca.






HOW DEAR TO ME THE HOUR.


How dear to me the hour when daylight dies,
  And sunbeams melt along the silent sea,
For then sweet dreams of other days arise,
  And memory breathes her vesper sigh to thee.

And, as I watch the line of light, that plays
  Along the smooth wave toward the burning west,
I long to tread that golden path of rays,
  And think 'twould lead to some bright isle of rest.






TAKE BACK THE VIRGIN PAGE.

WRITTEN ON RETURNING A BLANK BOOK.


Take back the virgin page,
  White and unwritten still;
Some hand, more calm and sage,
  The leaf must fill.
Thoughts come, as pure as light
  Pure as even _you_ require:
But, oh! each word I write
  Love turns to fire.

Yet let me keep the book:
  Oft shall my heart renew,
When on its leaves I look,
  Dear thoughts of you.
Like you, 'tis fair and bright;
  Like you, too bright and fair
To let wild passion write
  One wrong wish there.

Haply, when from those eyes
  Far, far away I roam.
Should calmer thoughts arise
  Towards you and home;
Fancy may trace some line,
  Worthy those eyes to meet,
Thoughts that not burn, but shine,
  Pure, calm, and sweet.

And as, o'er ocean, far,
  Seamen their records keep,
Led by some hidden star
  Thro' the cold deep;
So may the words I write
  Tell thro' what storms I stray--
  _You_ still the unseen light,
    Guiding my way.






THE LEGACY.


When in death I shall calmly recline,
  O bear my heart to my mistress dear;
Tell her it lived upon smiles and wine
  Of the brightest hue, while it lingered here.
Bid her not shed one tear of sorrow
  To sully a heart so brilliant and light;
But balmy drops of the red grape borrow,
  To bathe the relic from morn till night.

When the light of my song is o'er,
  Then take my harp to your ancient hall;
Hang it up at that friendly door,
  Where weary travellers love to call.[1]
Then if some bard, who roams forsaken,
  Revive its soft note in passing along,
Oh! let one thought of its master waken
  Your warmest smile for the child of song.
Keep this cup, which is now o'er-flowing,
  To grace your revel, when I'm at rest;
Never, oh! never its balm bestowing
  On lips that beauty has seldom blest.
But when some warm devoted lover
  To her he adores shall bathe its brim,
Then, then my spirit around shall hover,
  And hallow each drop that foams for him.


[1] "In every house was one or two harps, free to all travellers, who were
the more caressed, the more they excelled in music."--_O'Halloran_.






HOW OFT HAS THE BANSHEE CRIED.


    How oft has the Banshee cried,
    How oft has death untied
    Bright links that Glory wove,
    Sweet bonds entwined by Love!
Peace to each manly soul that sleepeth;
Rest to each faithful eye that weepeth;
    Long may the fair and brave
    Sigh o'er the hero's grave.

    We're fallen upon gloomy days![1]
    Star after star decays,
    Every bright name, that shed
    Light o'er the land, is fled.
Dark falls the tear of him who mourneth
Lost joy, or hope that ne'er returneth;
    But brightly flows the tear,
    Wept o'er a hero's bier.

    Quenched are our beacon lights--
    Thou, of the Hundred Fights![2]
    Thou, on whose burning tongue
    Truth, peace, and freedom hung!
Both mute,--but long as valor shineth,
Or Mercy's soul at war repineth,
    So long shall Erin's pride
    Tell how they lived and died.


[1] I have endeavored here, without losing that Irish character, which it
is my object to preserve throughout this work, to allude to the sad and
ominous fatality, by which England has been deprived of so many great and
good men, at a moment when she most requires all the aids of talent and
integrity.

[2] This designation, which has been before applied to Lord Nelson, is the
title given to a celebrated Irish Hero, in a Poem by O'Guive, the bard of
O'Niel, which is quoted in the "Philosophical Survey of the South of
Ireland," page 433. "Con, of the hundred Fights, sleep in thy grass-grown
tomb, and upbraid not our defeats with thy victories."






WE MAY ROAM THROUGH THIS WORLD.


We may roam thro' this world, like a child at a feast,
 Who but sips of a sweet, and then flies to the rest;
And, when pleasure begins to grow dull in the east,
 We may order our wings and be off to the west;
But if hearts that feel, and eyes that smile,
 Are the dearest gifts that heaven supplies,
We never need leave our own green isle,
 For sensitive hearts, and for sun-bright eyes.
Then remember, wherever your goblet is crowned,
 Thro' this world, whether eastward or westward you roam,
When a cup to the smile of dear woman goes round,
 Oh! remember the smile which adorns her at home.

In England, the garden of Beauty is kept
 By a dragon of prudery placed within call;
But so oft this unamiable dragon has slept,
 That the garden's but carelessly watched after all.
Oh! they want the wild sweet-briery fence,
 Which round the flowers of Erin dwells;
Which warns the touch, while winning the sense,
 Nor charms us least when it most repels.
Then remember, wherever your goblet is crowned,
 Thro' this world, whether eastward or westward you roam,
When a cup to the smile of dear woman goes round,
 Oh! remember the smile that adorns her at home.

In France, when the heart of a woman sets sail,
 On the ocean of wedlock its fortune to try,
Love seldom goes far in a vessel so frail,
 But just pilots her off, and then bids her good-by.
While the daughters of Erin keep the boy,
 Ever smiling beside his faithful oar,
Thro' billows of woe, and beams of joy,
 The same as he looked when he left the shore.
Then remember, wherever your goblet is crowned,
 Thro' this world, whether eastward or westward you roam,
When a cup to the smile of dear woman goes round,
 Oh! remember the smile that adorns her at home.






EVELEEN'S BOWER.


    Oh! weep for the hour,
    When to Eveleen's bower
The Lord of the Valley with false vows came;
    The moon hid her light
    From the heavens that night.
And wept behind her clouds o'er the maiden's shame.

    The clouds past soon
    From the chaste cold moon,
And heaven smiled again with her vestal flame:
    But none will see the day,
    When the clouds shall pass away,
Which that dark hour left upon Eveleen's fame.

    The white snow lay
    On the narrow path-way,
When the Lord of the Valley crost over the moor;
    And many a deep print
    On the white snow's tint
Showed the track of his footstep to Eveleen's door.

    The next sun's ray
    Soon melted away
Every trace on the path where the false Lord came;
    But there's a light above,
    Which alone can remove
That stain upon the snow of fair Eveleen's fame.






LET ERIN REMEMBER THE DAYS OF OLD.


Let Erin remember the days of old.
  Ere her faithless sons betrayed her;
When Malachi wore the collar of gold,[1]
Which he won from her proud invader.
When her kings, with standard of green unfurled,
  Led the Red-Branch Knights to danger;[2]
Ere the emerald gem of the western world
  Was set in the crown of a stranger.

On Lough Neagh's bank as the fisherman strays,
  When the clear cold eve's declining,
He sees the round towers of other days
  In the wave beneath him shining:
Thus shall memory often, in dreams sublime,
  Catch a glimpse of the days that are over;
Thus, sighing, look thro' the waves of time
For the long-faded glories they cover.[3]


[1] "This brought on an encounter between Malachi (the Monarch of Ireland
in the tenth century) and the Danes, in which Malachi defeated two of
their champions, whom he encountered successively, hand to hand, taking a
collar of gold from the neck of one, and carrying off the sword of the
other, as trophies of his victory."--_Warner's "History of Ireland,"_
vol. i. book ix.

[2] "Military orders of knights were very early established in Ireland;
long before the birth of Christ we find an hereditary order of Chivalry in
Ulster, called _Curaidhe na Craiobhe ruadh_, or the Knights of the
Red Branch, from their chief seat in Emania, adjoining to the palace of
the Ulster kings, called _Teagh na Craiobhe ruadh_, or the Academy of
the Red Branch; and contiguous to which was a large hospital, founded for
the sick knights and soldiers, called _Bronbhearg_, or the House of
the Sorrowful Soldier."--_O'Halloran's Introduction_, etc., part 1,
chap. 5.

[3] It was an old tradition, in the time of Giraldus, that Lough Neagh had
been originally a fountain, by whose sudden overflowing the country was
inundated, and a whole region, like the Atlantis of Plato, overwhelmed. He
says that the fishermen, in clear weather, used to point out to strangers
the tall ecclesiastical towers under the water.






THE SONG OF FIONNUALA.[1]


Silent, oh Moyle, be the roar of thy water,
  Break not, ye breezes, your chain of repose,
While, murmuring mournfully, Lir's lonely daughter
  Tells to the night-star her tale of woes.
When shall the swan, her death-note singing,
Sleep, with wings in darkness furled?
When will heaven, its sweet bell ringing,
Call my spirit from this stormy world?

Sadly, oh Moyle, to thy winter wave weeping,
Fate bids me languish long ages away;
Yet still in her darkness doth Erin lie sleeping,
Still doth the pure light its dawning delay.
When will that day-star, mildly springing,
Warm our isle with peace and love?
When will heaven, its sweet bell ringing,
Call my spirit to the fields above?


[1] To make this story intelligible in a song would require a much greater
number of verses than any one is authorized to inflict upon an audience at
once; the reader must therefore be content to learn, in a note, that
Fionnuala, the daughter of Lir, was, by some supernatural power,
transformed into a swan, and condemned to wander, for many hundred years,
over certain lakes and rivers in Ireland, till the coming of Christianity,
when the first sound of the mass-bell was to be the signal of her
release,--I found this fanciful fiction among some manuscript translations
from the Irish, which were begun under the direction of that enlightened
friend of Ireland, the late Countess of Moira.






COME, SEND ROUND THE WINE.


Come, send round the wine, and leave points of belief
To simpleton sages, and reasoning fools;
This moment's a flower too fair and brief,
To be withered and stained by the dust of the schools.
Your glass may be purple, and mine may be blue,
But, while they are filled from the same bright bowl,
The fool, who would quarrel for difference of hue,
Deserves not the comfort they shed o'er the soul.
Shall I ask the brave soldier, who fights by my side
In the cause of mankind, if our creeds agree?
Shall I give up the friend I have valued and tried,
If he kneel not before the same altar with me?
From the heretic girl of my soul should I fly,
To seek somewhere else a more orthodox kiss?
No, perish the hearts, and the laws that try
Truth, valor, or love, by a standard like this!






SUBLIME WAS THE WARNING.


Sublime was the warning that Liberty spoke,
And grand was the moment when Spaniards awoke
Into life and revenge from the conqueror's chain.
Oh, Liberty! let not this Spirit have rest,
Till it move, like a breeze, o'er the waves of the west--
Give the light of your look to each sorrowing spot,
Nor, oh, be the Shamrock of Erin forgot
While you add to your garland the Olive of Spain!

If the fame of our fathers, bequeathed with their rights,
Give to country its charm, and to home its delights,
If deceit be a wound, and suspicion a stain,
Then, ye men of Iberia; our cause is the same!
And oh!  may his tomb want a tear and a name,
Who would ask for a nobler, a holier death,
Than to turn his last sigh into victory's breath,
For the Shamrock of Erin and Olive of Spain!

Ye Blakes and O'Donnels, whose fathers resigned
The green hills of their youth, among strangers to find
That repose which, at home, they had sighed for in vain,
Join, join in our hope that the flame, which you light,
May be felt yet in Erin, as calm, and as bright,
And forgive even Albion while blushing she draws,
Like a truant, her sword, in the long-slighted cause
  Of the Shamrock of Erin and Olive of Spain!

God prosper the cause!--oh, it cannot but thrive,
While the pulse of one patriot heart is alive.
  Its devotion to feel, and its rights to maintain;
Then, how sainted by sorrow, its martyrs will die!
The finger of Glory shall point where they lie;
While, far from the footstep of coward or slave.
The young spirit of Freedom shall shelter their grave
  Beneath Shamrocks of Erin and Olives of Spain!






BELIEVE ME IF ALL THOSE ENDEARING YOUNG CHARMS.


Believe me, if all those endearing young charms,
  Which I gaze on so fondly today,
Were to change by to-morrow, and fleet in my arms,
  Like fairy-gifts fading away,
Thou wouldst still be adored, as this moment thou art.
  Let thy loveliness fade as it will.
And around the dear ruin each wish of my heart
  Would entwine itself verdantly still.

It is not while beauty and youth are thine own,
  And thy cheeks unprofaned by a tear,
That the fervor and faith of a soul can be known,
  To which time will but make thee more dear;
No, the heart that has truly loved never forgets,
  But as truly loves on to the close,
As the sun-flower turns on her god, when he sets,
  The same look which she turned when he rose.






ERIN, OH ERIN.


Like the bright lamp, that shone in Kildare's holy fane,[1]
  And burn'd thro' long ages of darkness and storm,
Is the heart that sorrows have frowned on in vain,
  Whose spirit outlives them, unfading and warm.
Erin, oh Erin, thus bright thro' the tears
Of a long night of bondage, thy spirit appears.

The nations have fallen, and thou still art young,
  Thy sun is but rising, when others are set;
And tho' slavery's cloud o'er thy morning hath hung,
  The full noon of freedom shall beam round thee yet.
Erin, oh Erin, tho' long in the shade,
Thy star will shine out when the proudest shall fade.

Unchilled by the rain, and unwaked by the wind,
  The lily lies sleeping thro' winter's cold hour,
Till Spring's light touch her fetters unbind,
  And daylight and liberty bless the young flower.
Thus Erin, oh Erin, _thy_ winter is past,
And the hope that lived thro' it shall blossom at last.


[1] The inextinguishable fire of St. Bridget, at Kildare, which Giraldus
mentions.






DRINK TO HER.


Drink to her, who long,
  Hath waked the poet's sigh.
The girl, who gave to song
  What gold could never buy.
Oh! woman's heart was made
  For minstrel hands alone;
By other fingers played,
  It yields not half the tone.
Then here's to her, who long
  Hath waked the poet's sigh,
The girl who gave to song
  What gold could never buy.

At Beauty's door of glass,
  When Wealth and Wit once stood,
They asked her '_which_ might pass?"
  She answered, "he, who could."
With golden key Wealth thought
  To pass--but 'twould not do:
While Wit a diamond brought,
  Which cut his bright way through.
So here's to her, who long
  Hath waked the poet's sigh,
The girl, who gave to song
  What gold could never buy.

The love that seeks a home
  Where wealth or grandeur shines,
Is like the gloomy gnome,
  That dwells in dark gold mines.
But oh! the poet's love
  Can boast a brighter sphere;
Its native home's above,
  Tho' woman keeps it here.
Then drink to her, who long
  Hath waked the poet's sigh,
The girl, who gave to song
  What gold could never buy.






OH! BLAME NOT THE BARD.[1]


Oh! blame not the bard, if he fly to the bowers,
  Where Pleasure lies, carelessly smiling at Fame;
He was born for much more, and in happier hours
  His soul might have burned with a holier flame.
The string, that now languishes loose o'er the lyre,
  Might have bent a proud bow to the warrior's dart;[2]
And the lip, which now breathes but the song of desire,
  Might have poured the full tide of a patriot's heart.

But alas for his country!--her pride is gone by,
  And that spirit is broken, which never would bend;
O'er the ruin her children in secret must sigh,
  For 'tis treason to love her, and death to defend.
Unprized are her sons, till they've learned to betray;
  Undistinguished they live, if they shame not their sires;
And the torch, that would light them thro' dignity's way,
  Must be caught from the pile, where their country expires.

Then blame not the bard, if in pleasure's soft dream,
  He should try to forget, what he never can heal:
Oh! give but a hope--let a vista but gleam
  Thro' the gloom of his country, and mark how he'll feel!
That instant, his heart at her shrine would lay down
  Every passion it nurst, every bliss it adored;
While the myrtle, now idly entwined with his crown,
  Like the wreath of Harmodius, should cover his sword.

But tho' glory be gone, and tho' hope fade away,
  Thy name, loved Erin, shall live in his songs;
Not even in the hour, when his heart is most gay,
  Will he lose the remembrance of thee and thy wrongs.
The stranger shall hear thy lament on his plains;
  The sigh of thy harp shall be sent o'er the deep,
Till thy masters themselves, as they rivet thy chains,
  Shall pause at the song of their captive, and weep!


[1] We may suppose this apology to have been uttered by one of those
wandering bards, whom Spenser so severely, and perhaps, truly, describes
in his State of Ireland, and whose poems, he tells us, "were sprinkled
with some pretty flowers of their natural device, which have good grace
and comeliness unto them, the which it is great pity to see abused to the
gracing of wickedness and vice, which, with good usage, would serve to
adorn and beautify virtue."

[2] It is conjectured by Wormius, that the name of Ireland is derived from
Yr, the Runic for a _bow_ in the use of which weapon the Irish were once
very expert. This derivation is certainly more creditable to us than the
following: "So that Ireland, called the land of _Ire_, from the constant
broils therein for 400 years, was now become the land of concord."
_Lloyd's "State Worthies_," art. _The Lord Grandison_.






WHILE GAZING ON THE MOON'S LIGHT.


While gazing on the moon's light,
  A moment from her smile I turned,
To look at orbs, that, more bright,
  In lone and distant glory burned.
        But _too_ far
        Each proud star,
  For me to feel its warming flame;
        Much more dear
        That mild sphere.
  Which near our planet smiling came;
Thus, Mary, be but thou my own;
  While brighter eyes unheeded play,
I'll love those moonlight looks alone,
  That bless my home and guide my way.

The day had sunk in dim showers,
  But midnight now, with lustre meet.
Illumined all the pale flowers,
  Like hope upon a mourner's cheek.
        I said (while
        The moon's smile
  Played o'er a stream, in dimpling bliss,)
        "The moon looks
        "On many brooks,
  "The brook can see no moon but this;"[1]
And thus, I thought, our fortunes run,
  For many a lover looks to thee,
While oh! I feel there is but _one_,
  _One_ Mary in the world for me.


[1] This image was suggested by the following thought, which occurs
somewhere In Sir William Jones's works: "The moon looks upon many night-
flowers, the night flower sees but one moon."






ILL OMENS.


When daylight was yet sleeping under the billow,
  And stars in the heavens still lingering shone.
Young Kitty, all blushing, rose up from her pillow,
  The last time she e'er was to press it alone.
For the youth! whom she treasured her heart and her soul in,
  Had promised to link the last tie before noon;
And when once the young heart of a maiden is stolen
  The maiden herself will steal after it soon.

As she looked in the glass, which a woman ne'er misses.
  Nor ever wants time for a sly glance or two,
A butterfly,[1] fresh from the night-flower's kisses.
  Flew over the mirror, and shaded her view.
Enraged with the insect for hiding her graces,
  She brushed him--he fell, alas; never to rise:
"Ah! such," said the girl, "is the pride of our faces,
  "For which the soul's innocence too often dies."

While she stole thro' the garden, where heart's-ease was growing,
  She culled some, and kist off its night-fallen dew;
And a rose, further on, looked so tempting and glowing,
  That, spite of her haste, she must gather it too:
But while o'er the roses too carelessly leaning,
  Her zone flew in two, and the
    heart's-ease was lost:
 "Ah! this means," said the girl
   (and she sighed at its meaning),
  "That love is scarce worth the
   repose it will cost!"


[1] An emblem of the soul.






BEFORE THE BATTLE.


By the hope within us springing,
  Herald of to-morrow's strife;
By that sun, whose light is bringing
  Chains or freedom, death or life--
  Oh! remember life can be
No charm for him, who lives not free!
  Like the day-star in the wave,
  Sinks a hero in his grave,
Midst the dew-fall of a nation's tears.

  Happy is he o'er whose decline
  The smiles of home may soothing shine
And light him down the steep of years:--
  But oh, how blest they sink to rest,
  Who close their eyes on victory's breast!

O'er his watch-fire's fading embers
  Now the foeman's cheek turns white,
When his heart that field remembers,
  Where we tamed his tyrant might.
Never let him bind again
A chain; like that we broke from then.
  Hark! the horn of combat calls--
  Ere the golden evening falls,
May we pledge that horn in triumph round![1]
  Many a heart that now beats high,
  In slumber cold at night shall lie,
Nor waken even at victory's sound--
  But oh, how blest that hero's sleep,
  O'er whom a wondering world shall weep!


[1] "The Irish Corna was not entirely devoted to martial purposes. In the
heroic ages, our ancestors quaffed Meadh out of them, as the Danish
hunters do their beverage at this day."--_Walker_.






AFTER THE BATTLE.


Night closed around the conqueror's way,
  And lightnings showed the distant hill,
Where those who lost that dreadful day,
  Stood few and faint, but fearless still.
The soldier's hope, the patriot's zeal,
  For ever dimmed, for ever crost--
Oh! who shall say what heroes feel,
  When all but life and honor's lost?

The last sad hour of freedom's dream,
  And valor's task, moved slowly by,
While mute they watcht, till morning's beam
  Should rise and give them light to die.
There's yet a world, where souls are free,
  Where tyrants taint not nature's bliss;--
If death that world's bright opening be,
  Oh! who would live a slave in this?






'TIS SWEET TO THINK.


'Tis sweet to think, that, where'er we rove,
  We are sure to find something blissful and dear.
And that, when we're far from the lips we love,
  We've but to make love to the lips, we are near.
The heart, like a tendril, accustomed to cling,
  Let it grow where it will, can not flourish alone,
But will lean to the nearest and loveliest thing
  It can twine with itself and make closely its own.

Then oh! what pleasure, where'er we rove,
  To be sure to find something still that is dear,
And to know, when far from the lips we love,
  We've but to make love to the lips we are near.

'Twere a shame, when flowers around us rise.
  To make light of the rest, if the rose isn't there;
And the world's so rich in resplendent eyes,
  'Twere a pity to limit one's love to a pair.
Love's wing and the peacock's are nearly alike,
  They are both of them bright, but they're changeable too,
And, wherever a new beam of beauty can strike,
  It will tincture Love's plume with a different hue.
Then oh! what pleasure, where'er we rove,
  To be sure to find something still that is dear,
And to know, when far from the lips we love,
  We've but to make love to the lips we are near.






THE IRISH PEASANT TO HIS MISTRESS.[1]


Thro' grief and thro' danger thy smile hath cheered my way,
Till hope seemed to bud from each thorn that round me lay;
The darker our fortune, the brighter our pure love burned,
Till shame into glory, till fear into zeal was turned;
Yes, slave as I was, in thy arms my spirit felt free,
And blest even the sorrows that made me more dear to thee.

Thy rival was honored, while thou wert wronged and scorned,
Thy crown was of briers, while gold her brows adorned;
She wooed me to temples, while thou lay'st hid in caves,
Her friends were all masters, while thine, alas! were slaves;
Yet cold in the earth, at thy feet, I would rather be,
Than wed what I loved not, or turn one thought from thee.

They slander thee sorely, who say thy vows are frail--
Hadst thou been a false one, thy cheek had looked less pale.
They say, too, so long thou hast worn those lingering chains,
That deep in thy heart they have printed their servile stains--
Oh! foul is the slander,--no chain could that soul subdue--
Where shineth _thy_ spirit, there liberty shineth too![2]


[1] Meaning, allegorically, the ancient Church of Ireland.

[2] "Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty"--_St. Paul's
Corinthians_ ii., l7.






ON MUSIC.


When thro' life unblest we rove,
  Losing all that made life dear,
Should some notes we used to love,
  In days of boyhood, meet our ear,
Oh! how welcome breathes the strain!
  Wakening thoughts that long have slept;
Kindling former smiles again
  In faded eyes that long have wept.

Like the gale, that sighs along
  Beds of oriental flowers,
Is the grateful breath of song,
  That once was heard in happier hours;
Filled with balm, the gale sighs on,
  Tho' the flowers have sunk in death;
So, when pleasure's dream is gone,
  Its memory lives in Music's breath.

Music, oh how faint, how weak,
  Language fades before thy spell!
Why should Feeling ever speak,
  When thou canst breathe her soul so well?
Friendship's balmy words may feign,
  Love's are even more false than they;
Oh! 'tis only music's strain
  Can sweetly soothe, and not betray.






IT IS NOT THE TEAR AT THIS MOMENT SHED.[1]


It is not the tear at this moment shed,
  When the cold turf has just been laid o'er him,
That can tell how beloved was the friend that's fled,
  Or how deep in our hearts we deplore him.
'Tis the tear, thro' many a long day wept,
  'Tis life's whole path o'ershaded;
'Tis the one remembrance, fondly kept,
  When all lighter griefs have faded.

Thus his memory, like some holy light,
  Kept alive in our hearts, will improve them,
For worth shall look fairer, and truth more bright,
  When we think how we lived but to love them.
And, as fresher flowers the sod perfume
  Where buried saints are lying,
So our hearts shall borrow a sweetening bloom
  From the image he left there in dying!


[1] These lines were occasioned by the loss of a very near and
dear relative, who had died lately at Madeira.






THE ORIGIN OF THE HARP.


'Tis believed that this Harp, which I wake now for thee,
Was a Siren of old, who sung under the sea;
And who often, at eve, thro' the bright waters roved,
To meet, on the green shore, a youth whom she loved.

But she loved him in vain, for he left her to weep,
And in tears, all the night, her gold tresses to steep;
Till heaven looked with pity on true-love so warm,
And changed to this soft Harp the sea-maiden's form.

Still her bosom rose fair--still her cheeks smiled the same--
While her sea-beauties gracefully formed the light frame;
And her hair, as, let loose, o'er her white arm it fell,
Was changed to bright chords uttering melody's spell.

Hence it came, that this soft Harp so long hath been known
To mingle love's language with sorrow's sad tone;
Till _thou_ didst divide them, and teach the fond lay
To speak love when I'm near thee, and grief when away.






LOVE'S YOUNG DREAM.


Oh! the days are gone, when Beauty bright
    My heart's chain wove;
When my dream of life, from morn till night,
    Was love, still love.
    New hope may bloom,
    And days may come,

  Of milder, calmer beam,
But there's nothing half so sweet in life
  As love's young dream;
No, there's nothing half so sweet in life
  As love's young dream.

Tho' the bard to purer fame may soar,
      When wild youth's past;
Tho' he win the wise, who frowned before,
      To smile at last;
      He'll never meet
      A joy so sweet,
  In all his noon of fame,
As when first he sung to woman's ear
  His soul-felt flame,
And, at every close, she blushed to hear
  The one lov'd name.

No,--that hallowed form is ne'er forgot
      Which first love traced;
Still it lingering haunts the greenest spot
      On memory's waste.
      'Twas odor fled
      As soon as shed;
  'Twas morning's winged dream;
'Twas a light, that ne'er can shine again
  On life's dull stream:
Oh! 'twas light that ne'er can shine again
  On life's dull stream.






THE PRINCE'S DAY.[1]


Tho' dark are our sorrows, to-day we'll forget them,
  And smile thro' our tears, like a sunbeam in showers:
There never were hearts, if our rulers would let them,
  More formed to be grateful and blest than ours.
      But just when the chain
    Has ceased to pain,
  And hope has enwreathed it round with flowers,
      There comes a new link
      Our spirits to sink--
Oh! the joy that we taste, like the light of the poles,
  Is a flash amid darkness, too brilliant to stay;
But, tho' 'twere the last little spark in our souls,
  We must light it up now, on our Prince's Day.

Contempt on the minion, who calls you disloyal!
  Tho' fierce to your foe, to your friends you are true;
And the tribute most high to a head that is royal,
  Is love from a heart that loves liberty too.
      While cowards, who blight
      Your fame, your right,
Would shrink from the blaze of the battle array,
      The Standard of Green
      In front would be seen,--
Oh, my life on your faith! were you summoned this minute,
  You'd cast every bitter remembrance away,
And show what the arm of old Erin has in it,
  When roused by the foe, on her Prince's Day.

He loves the Green Isle, and his love is recorded
  In hearts, which have suffered too much to forget;
And hope shall be crowned, and attachment rewarded,
  And Erin's gay jubilee shine out yet.
      The gem may be broke
      By many a stroke,
  But nothing can cloud its native ray:
      Each fragment will cast
      A light, to the last,--
And thus, Erin, my country tho' broken thou art,
  There's a lustre within thee that ne'er will decay;
A spirit, which beams thro' each suffering part,
  And now smiles at all pain on the Prince's Day.


[1] This song was written for a _fte_ in honor of the Prince of
Wales's Birthday, given by my friend, Major Bryan, at his seat in the
county of Kilkenny.






WEEP ON, WEEP ON.


Weep on, weep on, your hour is past;
  Your dreams of pride are o'er;
The fatal chain is round you cast,
  And you are men no more.
In vain the hero's heart hath bled;
  The sage's tongue hath warned in vain;--
Oh, Freedom! once thy flame hath fled,
  It never lights again.

Weep on--perhaps in after days,
  They'll learn to love your name;
When many a deed may wake in praise
  That long hath slept in blame.
And when they tread the ruined isle,
  Where rest, at length, the lord and slave,
They'll wondering ask, how hands so vile
  Could conquer hearts so brave?

"'Twas fate," they'll say, "a wayward fate
  "Your web of discord wove;
"And while your tyrants joined in hate,
  "You never joined in love.
"But hearts fell off, that ought to twine,
  "And man profaned what God had given;
"Till some were heard to curse the shrine,
  "Where others knelt to heaven!"






LESBIA HATH A BEAMING EYE.


Lesbia hath a beaming eye,
  But no one knows for whom it beameth;
Right and left its arrows fly,
  But what they aim at no one dreameth.
Sweeter 'tis to gaze upon
  My Nora's lid that seldom rises;
Few its looks, but every one,
  Like unexpected light, surprises!
    Oh, My Nora Creina, dear,
  My gentle, bashful Nora Creina,
      Beauty lies
      In many eyes,
  But love in yours, My Nora Creina.

Lesbia wears a robe of gold,
  But all so close the nymph hath laced it,
Not a charm of beauty's mould
  Presumes to stay where nature placed it.
Oh! my Nora's gown for me,
  That floats as wild as mountain breezes,
Leaving every beauty free
  To sink or swell as Heaven pleases.
    Yes, my Nora Creina, dear.
  My simple, graceful Nora Creina,
      Nature's dress
      Is loveliness--
  The dress _you_ wear, my Nora Creina.

Lesbia hath a wit refined,
  But, when its points are gleaming round us,
Who can tell if they're designed
  To dazzle merely, or to wound us?
Pillowed on my Nora's heart,
  In safer slumber Love reposes--
Bed of peace! whose roughest part
  Is but the crumpling of the roses.
    Oh! my Nora Creina dear,
  My mild, my artless Nora Creina,
      Wit, though bright,
      Hath no such light,
  As warms your eyes, my Nora Creina.






I SAW THY FORM IN YOUTHFUL PRIME.


I saw thy form in youthful prime,
  Nor thought that pale decay
Would steal before the steps of Time,
  And waste its bloom away, Mary!

Yet still thy features wore that light,
  Which fleets not with the breath;
And life ne'er looked more truly bright
  Than in thy smile of death, Mary!

As streams that run o'er golden mines,
  Yet humbly, calmly glide,
Nor seem to know the wealth that shines
  Within their gentle tide, Mary!
So veiled beneath the simplest guise,
  Thy radiant genius shone,
And that, which charmed all other eyes,
  Seemed worthless in thy own, Mary!

If souls could always dwell above,
  Thou ne'er hadst left that sphere;
Or could we keep the souls we love,
  We ne'er had lost thee here, Mary!
Though many a gifted mind we meet,
  Though fairest forms we see,
To live with them is far less sweet,
  Than to remember thee, Mary!






BY THAT LAKE, WHOSE GLOOMY SHORE.[1]


By that Lake, whose gloomy shore
Sky-lark never warbles o'er,[2]
Where the cliff hangs high and steep,
Young St. Kevin stole to sleep.
"Here, at least," he calmly said,
"Woman ne'er shall find my bed."
Ah! the good Saint little knew
What that wily sex can do."

'Twas from Kathleen's eyes he flew,--
Eyes of most unholy blue!
She had loved him well and long
Wished him hers, nor thought it wrong.
Wheresoe'er the Saint would fly,
Still he heard her light foot nigh;
East or west, where'er he turned,
Still her eyes before him burned.

On the bold cliff's bosom cast,
Tranquil now, he sleeps at last;
Dreams of heaven, nor thinks that e'er
Woman's smile can haunt him there.
But nor earth nor heaven is free,
From her power, if fond she be:
Even now, while calm he sleeps,
Kathleen o'er him leans and weeps.

Fearless she had tracked his feet
To this rocky, wild retreat;
And when morning met his view,
Her mild glances met it, too.
Ah, your Saints have cruel hearts!
Sternly from his bed he starts,
And with rude, repulsive shock,
Hurls her from the beetling rock.

Glendalough, thy gloomy wave
Soon was gentle Kathleen's grave!
Soon the Saint (yet ah! too late,)
Felt her love, and mourned her fate.
When he said, "Heaven rest her soul!"
Round the Lake light music stole;
And her ghost was seen to glide,
Smiling o'er the fatal tide.


[1] This ballad is founded upon one of the many stories related of St.
Kevin, whose bed in the rock is to be seen at Glendalough, a most gloomy
and romantic spot in the county of Wicklow.

[2] There are many other curious traditions concerning this Lake, which
may be found in Giraldus, Colgan, etc.






SHE IS FAR FROM THE LAND.


She is far from the land where her young hero sleeps,
  And lovers are round her, sighing:
But coldly she turns from their gaze, and weeps,
  For her heart in his grave is lying.

She sings the wild song of her dear native plains,
  Every note which he loved awaking;--
Ah! little they think who delight in her strains,
  How the heart of the Minstrel is breaking.

He had lived for his love, for his country he died,
  They were all that to life had entwined him;
Nor soon shall the tears of his country be dried,
  Nor long will his love stay behind him.

Oh! make her a grave where the sunbeams rest,
  When they promise a glorious morrow;
They'll shine o'er her sleep, like a smile from the West,
  From her own loved island of sorrow.






NAY, TELL ME NOT, DEAR.


Nay, tell me not, dear, that the goblet drowns
  One charm of feeling, one fond regret;
Believe me, a few of thy angry frowns
  Are all I've sunk in its bright wave yet.
    Ne'er hath a beam
    Been lost in the stream
  That ever was shed from thy form or soul;
    The spell of those eyes,
    The balm of thy sighs,
  Still float on the surface, and hallow my bowl,
Then fancy not, dearest, that wine can steal
  One blissful dream of the heart from me;
Like founts that awaken the pilgrim's zeal,
  The bowl but brightens my love for thee.

They tell us that love in his fairy bower,
  Had two blush-roses of birth divine;
He sprinkled the one with a rainbow shower,
  But bathed the other with mantling wine.
    Soon did the buds,
    That drank of the floods
  Distilled by the rainbow, decline and fade;
    While those which the tide
    Of ruby had dyed
  All blushed into beauty, like thee, sweet maid!
Then fancy not, dearest, that wine can steal
  One blissful dream of the heart from me;
Like founts, that awaken the pilgrim's zeal,
  The bowl but brightens my love for thee.






AVENGING AND BRIGHT.


Avenging and bright fall the swift sword of Erin[1]
  On him who the brave sons of Usna betrayed!
For every fond eye he hath wakened a tear in,
  A drop from his heart-wounds shall weep o'er her blade.

By the red cloud that hung over Conor's dark dwelling,[2]
   When Ulad's[3] three champions lay sleeping in gore--
By the billows of war, which so often, high swelling,
  Have wafted these heroes to victory's shore--

We swear to revenge them!--no joy shall be tasted,
  The harp shall be silent, the maiden unwed,
Our halls shall be mute and our fields shall lie wasted,
  Till vengeance is wreaked on the murderer's head.

Yes, monarch! tho' sweet are our home recollections,
  Tho' sweet are the tears that from tenderness fall;
Tho' sweet are our friendships, our hopes, our affections,
  Revenge on a tyrant is sweetest of all!


[1] The words of this song were suggested by the very ancient Irish story
called "Deirdri, or the Lamentable Fate of the Sons of Usnach." The
treachery of Conor, King of Ulster, in putting to death the three sons of
Usna, was the cause of a desolating war against Ulster, which terminated
in the destruction of Eman.

[2] "Oh Nasi! view that cloud that I here see in the sky! I see over
Eman-green a chilling cloud of blood-tinged red."--_Deirdri's Song_.

[3] Ulster.






WHAT THE BEE IS TO THE FLOWERET.


HE.

What the bee is to the floweret,
  When he looks for honey-dew,
Thro' the leaves that close embower it,
  That, my love, I'll be to you.

SHE.

What the bank, with verdure glowing,
  Is to waves that wander near,
Whispering kisses, while they're going,
  That I'll be to you, my dear.

SHE.

But they say, the bee's a rover,
  Who will fly, when sweets are gone;
And, when once the kiss is over,
  Faithless brooks will wander on.

HE.

Nay, if flowers _will_ lose their looks,
  If sunny banks _will_ wear away,
Tis but right that bees and brooks
 Should sip and kiss them while they may.






LOVE AND THE NOVICE.


"Here we dwell, in holiest bowers,
  "Where angels of light o'er our orisons bend;
"Where sighs of devotion and breathings of flowers
  "To heaven in mingled odor ascend.
    "Do not disturb our calm, oh Love!
    "So like is thy form to the cherubs above,
"It well might deceive such hearts as ours."

Love stood near the Novice and listened,
  And Love is no novice in taking a hint;
His laughing blue eyes soon with piety glistened;
  His rosy wing turned to heaven's own tint.
    "Who would have thought," the urchin cries,
    "That Love could so well, so gravely disguise
"His wandering wings and wounding eyes?"

Love now warms thee, waking and sleeping,
  Young Novice, to him all thy orisons rise.
_He_ tinges the heavenly fount with his weeping,
  _He_ brightens the censer's flame with his sighs.
    Love is the Saint enshrined in thy breast,
    And angels themselves would admit such a guest,
If he came to them clothed in Piety's vest.






THIS LIFE IS ALL CHECKERED WITH PLEASURES AND WOES


This life is all checkered with pleasures and woes,
  That chase one another like waves of the deep,--
Each brightly or darkly, as onward it flows,
  Reflecting our eyes, as they sparkle or weep.
So closely our whims on our miseries tread,
  That the laugh is awaked ere the tear can be dried;
And, as fast as the rain-drop of Pity is shed.
   The goose-plumage of Folly can turn it aside.
But pledge me the cup--if existence would cloy,
   With hearts ever happy, and heads ever wise,
Be ours the light Sorrow, half-sister to Joy,
   And the light, brilliant Folly that flashes and dies.
When Hylas was sent with his urn to the fount,
   Thro' fields full of light, and with heart full of play,
Light rambled the boy, over meadow and mount,
   And neglected his task for the flowers on the way.
Thus many, like me, who in youth should have tasted
   The fountain that runs by Philosophy's shrine,
Their time with the flowers on the margin have wasted,
   And left their light urns all as empty as mine.
But pledge me the goblet;--while Idleness weaves
   These flowerets together, should Wisdom but see
One bright drop or two that has fallen on the leaves
   From her fountain divine, 'tis sufficient for me.






OH THE SHAMROCK.


   Thro' Erin's Isle,
   To sport awhile,
As Love and Valor wandered,
   With Wit, the sprite,
   Whose quiver bright
A thousand arrows squandered.
   Where'er they pass,
   A triple grass[1]
Shoots up, with dew-drops streaming.
   As softly green
   As emeralds seen
Thro' purest crystal gleaming.
Oh the Shamrock, the green, immortal Shamrock!
   Chosen leaf.
   Of Bard and Chief,
Old Erin's native Shamrock!

   Says Valor, "See,
   "They spring for me,
"Those leafy gems of morning!"--
  Says Love, "No, no,
  "For _me_ they grow,
"My fragrant path adorning."
   But Wit perceives
   The triple leaves,
And cries, "Oh! do not sever
   "A type, that blends
   "Three godlike friends,
"Love, Valor, Wit, for ever!"
Oh the Shamrock, the green, immortal Shamrock!
   Chosen leaf
   Of Bard and Chief,
Old Erin's native Shamrock!

   So firmly fond
   May last the bond,
They wove that morn together,
   And ne'er may fall
   One drop of gall
On Wit's celestial feather.
   May Love, as twine
   His flowers divine.
Of thorny falsehood weed 'em;
   May Valor ne'er
   His standard rear
Against the cause of Freedom!
Oh the Shamrock, the green, immortal Shamrock!
   Chosen leaf
   Of Bard and Chief,
Old Erin's native Shamrock!


[1] It is said that St. Patrick, when preaching the Trinity to the Pagan
Irish, used to illustrate his subject by reference to that species of
trefoil called in Ireland by the name of the Shamrock; and hence, perhaps,
the Island of Saints adopted this plant as her national emblem. Hope,
among the ancients, was sometimes represented as a beautiful child,
standing upon tiptoes, and a trefoil or three-colored grass in her hand.






AT THE MID HOUR OF NIGHT


At the mid hour of night, when stars are weeping, I fly
To the lone vale we loved, when life shone warm in thine eye;
And I think oft, if spirits can steal from the regions of air,
To revisit past scenes of delight, thou wilt come to me there,
And tell me our love is remembered, even in the sky.

Then I sing the wild song 'twas once such pleasure to hear
When our voices commingling breathed, like one, on the ear;
And, as Echo far off thro' the vale my sad orison rolls,
I think, oh my love! 'tis thy voice from the Kingdom of Souls,[1]
Faintly answering still the notes that once were so dear.


[1] "There are countries." says Montaigne, "where they believe the souls
of the happy live in all manner of liberty, in delightful fields; and
there it is those souls, repeating the words we utter, which we call
Echo."






ONE BUMPER AT PARTING.


One bumper at parting!--tho' many
  Have circled the board since we met,
The fullest, the saddest of any
  Remains to be crowned by us yet.
The sweetness that pleasure hath in it,
  Is always so slow to come forth,
That seldom, alas, till the minute
  It dies, do we know half its worth.
But come,--may our life's happy measure
  Be all of such moments made up;
They're born on the bosom of Pleasure,
  They die midst the tears of the cup.

'Tis onward we journey, how pleasant
  To pause and inhabit awhile
Those few sunny spots, like the present,
  That mid the dull wilderness smile!
But Time, like a pitiless master,
  Cries "Onward!" and spurs the gay hours--
Ah, never doth Time travel faster,
  Than when his way lies among flowers.
But come--may our life's happy measure
  Be all of such moments made up;
They're born on the bosom of Pleasure,
  They die midst the tears of the cup.

We saw how the sun looked in sinking,
  The waters beneath him how bright;
And now, let our farewell of drinking
  Resemble that farewell of light.
You saw how he finished, by darting
  His beam o'er a deep billow's brim--
So, fill up, let's shine at our parting,
  In full liquid glory, like him.
And oh! may our life's happy measure
  Of moments like this be made up,
'Twas born on the bosom of Pleasure,
  It dies mid the tears of the cup.






'TIS THE LAST ROSE OF SUMMER.


'Tis the last rose of summer
  Left blooming alone;
All her lovely companions
  Are faded and gone;
No flower of her kindred,
  No rose-bud is nigh,
To reflect back her blushes,
  Or give sigh for sigh.

I'll not leave thee, thou lone one!
  To pine on the stem;
Since the lovely are sleeping.
  Go, sleep thou with them.
Thus kindly I scatter
  Thy leaves o'er the bed,
Where thy mates of the garden
  Lie scentless and dead.

So soon may _I_ follow,
  When friendships decay,
And from Love's shining circle
  The gems drop away.
When true hearts lie withered,
  And fond ones are flown,
Oh! who would inhabit
  This bleak world alone?






THE YOUNG MAY MOON.


The young May moon is beaming, love,
The glow-worm's lamp is gleaming, love,
   How sweet to rove
   Through Morna's grove,
When the drowsy world is dreaming, love!
Then awake!--the heavens look bright, my dear,
'Tis never too late for delight, my dear,
   And the best of all ways
   To lengthen our days,
Is to steal a few hours from the night, my dear!

Now all the world is sleeping, love,
But the Sage, his star-watch keeping, love,
   And I, whose star,
   More glorious far,
Is the eye from that casement peeping, love.
Then awake!--till rise of sun, my dear,
The Sage's glass we'll shun, my dear,
   Or, in watching the flight
   Of bodies of light,
He might happen to take thee for one, my dear.






THE MINSTREL-BOY.


The Minstrel-Boy to the war is gone,
  In the ranks of death you'll find him;
His father's sword he has girded on.
  And his wild harp slung behind him.
"Land of song!" said the warrior-bard,
  "Tho' all the world betrays thee,
"_One_ sword, at least, thy rights shall guard,
  "_One_ faithful harp shall praise thee!"

The Minstrel fell!--but the foeman's chain
  Could not bring his proud soul under;
The harp he loved ne'er spoke again,
  For he tore its chords asunder;
And said, "No chains shall sully thee,
  "Thou soul of love and bravery!
"Thy songs were made for the pure and free,
  "They shall never sound in slavery."






THE SONG OF O'RUARK,

PRINCE OF BREFFNI.[1]


The valley lay smiling before me,
   Where lately I left her behind;
Yet I trembled, and something hung o'er me,
  That saddened the joy of my mind.
I looked for the lamp which, she told me,
  Should shine, when her Pilgrim returned;
But, tho' darkness began to infold me,
  No lamp from the battlements burned!

I flew to her chamber--'twas lonely,
  As if the loved tenant lay dead;--
Ah, would it were death, and death only!
  But no, the young false one had fled.
And there hung the lute that could soften
  My very worst pains into bliss;
While the hand, that had waked it so often,
  Now throbbed to a proud rival's kiss.

There _was_ a time, falsest of women,
  When Breffni's good sword would have sought
That man, thro' a million of foe-men,
  Who dared but to wrong thee _in thought_!
While now--oh degenerate daughter
  Of Erin, how fallen is thy fame!
And thro' ages of bondage and slaughter,
  Our country shall bleed for thy shame.

Already, the curse is upon her,
  And strangers her valleys profane;
They come to divide, to dishonor,
  And tyrants they long will remain.
But onward!--the green banner rearing,
  Go, flesh every sword to the hilt;
On _our_ side is Virtue and Erin,
  On _theirs_ is the Saxon and Guilt.


[1] These stanzas are founded upon an event of most melancholy importance
to Ireland; if, as we are told by our Irish historians, it gave England
the first opportunity of profiting by our divisions and subduing us. The
following are the circumstances, as related by O'Halloran:--"The king of
Leinster had long conceived a violent affection for Dearbhorgil, daughter
to the king of Meath, and though she had been for some time married to
O'Ruark, prince of Breffni, yet it could not restrain his passion. They
carried on a private correspondence, and she informed him that O'Ruark,
intended soon to go on a pilgrimage (an act of piety frequent in those
days), and conjured him to embrace that opportunity of conveying her from
a husband she detested to a lover she adored. MacMurchad too punctually
obeyed the summons, and had the lady conveyed to his capital of Ferns."--
The monarch Roderick espoused the cause of O'Ruark, while MacMurchad fled
to England, and obtained the assistance of Henry II.

"Such," adds Giraldus Cambrensis (as I find him in an old translation)
"is the variable and fickle nature of woman, by whom all mischief in the
world (for the most part) do happen and come, as may appear by Marcus
Antonius, and by the destruction of Troy."






OH! HAD WE SOME BRIGHT LITTLE ISLE OF OUR OWN.


Oh! had we some bright little isle of our own,
In a blue summer ocean, far off and alone,
Where a leaf never dies in the still blooming bowers,
And the bee banquets on thro' a whole year of flowers;
  Where the sun loves to pause
    With so fond a delay,
  That the night only draws
    A thin veil o'er the day;
Where simply to feel that we breathe, that we live,
Is worth the best joy that life elsewhere can give.

There, with souls ever ardent and pure as the clime,
We should love, as they loved in the first golden time;
The glow of the sunshine, the balm of the air,
Would steal to our hearts, and make all summer there.
  With affection as free
    From decline as the bowers,
  And, with hope, like the bee,
    Living always on flowers,
Our life should resemble a long day of light,
And our death come on, holy and calm as the night.






FAREWELL!--BUT WHENEVER YOU WELCOME THE HOUR.


Farewell!--but whenever you welcome the hour.
That awakens the night-song of mirth in your bower,
Then think of the friend who once welcomed it too,
And forgot his own griefs to be happy with you.
His griefs may return, not a hope may remain
Of the few that have brightened his pathway of pain.
But he ne'er will forget the short vision, that threw
Its enchantment around him, while lingering with you.
And still on that evening, when pleasure fills up
To the highest top sparkle each heart and each cup,
Where'er my path lies, be it gloomy or bright,
My soul, happy friends, shall be with you that night;


Shall join in your revels, your sports, and your wiles,
And return to me, beaming all o'er with your smiles--
Too blest, if it tells me that, mid the gay cheer
Some kind voice had murmured, "I wish he were here!"

Let Fate do her worst, there are relics of joy,
Bright dreams of the past, which she cannot destroy;
Which come in the night-time of sorrow and care,
And bring back the features that joy used to wear.
Long, long be my heart with such memories filled!
Like the vase, in which roses have once been distilled--
You may break, you may shatter the vase, if you will,
But the scent of the roses will hang round it still.






OH! DOUBT ME NOT.


    Oh! doubt me not--the season
      Is o'er, when Folly made me rove,
    And now the vestal, Reason,
      Shall watch the fire awaked by love.
Altho' this heart was early blown,
  And fairest hands disturbed the tree,
They only shook some blossoms down,
  Its fruit has all been kept for thee.
    Then doubt me not--the season
      Is o'er, when Folly made me rove,
    And now the vestal, Reason,
      Shall watch the fire awaked by Love.

    And tho' my lute no longer
      May sing of Passion's ardent spell,
    Yet, trust me, all the stronger
      I feel the bliss I do not tell.
The bee thro' many a garden roves,
  And hums his lay of courtship o'er,
But when he finds the flower he loves,
  He settles there, and hums no more.
    Then doubt me not--the season
      Is o'er, when Folly kept me free,
    And now the vestal, Reason,
      Shall guard the flame awaked by thee.






YOU REMEMBER ELLEN.


You remember Ellen, our hamlet's pride,
  How meekly she blest her humble lot,
When the stranger, William, had made her his bride,
  And love was the light of their lowly cot.
Together they toiled through winds and rains,
  Till William, at length, in sadness said,
"We must seek our fortune on other plains;"--
  Then, sighing, she left her lowly shed.

They roamed a long and a weary way,
  Nor much was the maiden's heart at ease,
When now, at close of one stormy day,
  They see a proud castle among the trees.
"To-night," said the youth, "we'll shelter there;
  "The wind blows cold, the hour is late:"
So he blew the horn with a chieftain's air,
  And the Porter bowed, as they past the gate.

"Now, welcome, Lady," exclaimed the youth,--
  "This castle is thine, and these dark woods all!"
She believed him crazed, but his words were truth,
  For Ellen is Lady of Rosna Hall!
And dearly the Lord of Rosna loves
  What William the stranger wooed and wed;
And the light of bliss, in these lordly groves,
  Shines pure as it did in the lowly shed.






I'D MOURN THE HOPES.


I'd mourn the hopes that leave me,
  If thy smiles had left me too;
I'd weep when friends deceive me,
  If thou wert, like them, untrue.
But while I've thee before me,
  With heart so warm and eyes so bright,
No clouds can linger o'er me,
  That smile turns them all to light.

'Tis not in fate to harm me,
  While fate leaves thy love to me;
'Tis not in joy to charm me,
  Unless joy be shared with thee.
One minute's dream about thee
  Were worth a long, an endless year
Of waking bliss without thee,
  My own love, my only dear!

And tho' the hope be gone, love,
  That long sparkled o'er our way,
Oh! we shall journey on, love,
  More safely, without its ray.
Far better lights shall win me
  Along the path I've yet to roam:--
The mind that burns within me,
  And pure smiles from thee at home.

Thus, when the lamp that lighted
  The traveller at first goes out,
He feels awhile benighted.
  And looks round in fear and doubt.
But soon, the prospect clearing,
  By cloudless starlight on he treads,
And thinks no lamp so cheering
  As that light which Heaven sheds.






COME O'ER THE SEA.


    Come o'er the sea,
    Maiden, with me,
  Mine thro' sunshine, storm, and snows;
    Seasons may roll,
    But the true soul
  Burns the same, where'er it goes.
Let fate frown on, so we love and part not;
'Tis life where _thou_ art, 'tis death where thou art not.
    Then come o'er the sea,
    Maiden, with me,
  Come wherever the wild wind blows;
    Seasons may roll,
    But the true soul
  Burns the same, where'er it goes.

    Was not the sea
    Made for the Free,
  Land for courts and chains alone?
    Here we are slaves,
    But, on the waves,
  Love and Liberty's all our own.
No eye to watch, and no tongue to wound us,
All earth forgot, and all heaven around us--
    Then come o'er the sea,
    Maiden, with me,
  Mine thro' sunshine, storm, and snows;
    Seasons may roll,
    But the true soul
  Burns the same, where'er it goes.






HAS SORROW THY YOUNG DAYS SHADED.


Has sorrow thy young days shaded,
  As clouds o'er the morning fleet?
Too fast have those young days faded,
  That, even in sorrow, were sweet?
Does Time with his cold wing wither
  Each feeling that once was dear?--
Then, child of misfortune, come hither,
  I'll weep with thee, tear for tear.

Has love to that soul, so tender,
  Been like our Lagenian mine,[1]
Where sparkles of golden splendor
  All over the surface shine--
But, if in pursuit we go deeper,
  Allured by the gleam that shone,
Ah! false as the dream of the sleeper,
  Like Love, the bright ore is gone.

Has Hope, like the bird in the story,[2]
  That flitted from tree to tree
With the talisman's glittering glory--
  Has Hope been that bird to thee?
On branch after branch alighting,
  The gem did she still display,
And, when nearest and most inviting.
  Then waft the fair gem away?

If thus the young hours have fleeted,
  When sorrow itself looked bright;
If thus the fair hope hath cheated,
  That led thee along so light;
If thus the cold world now wither
  Each feeling that once was dear:--
Come, child of misfortune, come hither,
  I'll weep with thee, tear for tear.


[1] Our Wicklow Gold Mines, to which this verse alludes, deserve, I fear,
but too well the character here given of them.

[2] "The bird, having got its prize, settled not far off, with the
talisman in his mouth. The prince drew near it, hoping it would drop it:
but as he approached, the bird took wing, and settled again,"
etc.--"_Arabian Nights_."






NO, NOT MORE WELCOME.


No, not more welcome the fairy numbers
  Of music fall on the sleeper's ear,
When half-awaking from fearful slumbers,
  He thinks the full choir of heaven is near,--
Than came that voice, when, all forsaken.
  This heart long had sleeping lain,
Nor thought its cold pulse would ever waken
  To such benign, blessed sounds again.

Sweet voice of comfort! 'twas like the stealing
  Of summer wind thro' some wreathed shell--
Each secret winding, each inmost feeling
  Of my soul echoed to its spell.
'Twas whispered balm--'twas sunshine spoken!--
  I'd live years of grief and pain
To have my long sleep of sorrow broken
  By such benign, blessed sounds again.






WHEN FIRST I MET THEE.


When first I met thee, warm and young,
  There shone such truth about thee.
And on thy lip such promise hung,
  I did not dare to doubt thee.
I saw the change, yet still relied,
  Still clung with hope the fonder,
And thought, tho' false to all beside,
  From me thou couldst not wander.
    But go, deceiver! go,
      The heart, whose hopes could make it
    Trust one so false, so low,
      Deserves that thou shouldst break it.

When every tongue thy follies named,
  I fled the unwelcome story;
Or found, in even the faults they blamed,
  Some gleams of future glory.
_I_ still was true, when nearer friends
  Conspired to wrong, to slight thee;
The heart that now thy falsehood rends,
  Would then have bled to right thee,
    But go, deceiver! go,--
      Some day, perhaps, thou'lt waken
    From pleasure's dream, to know
      The grief of hearts forsaken.

Even now, tho' youth its bloom has shed,
  No lights of age adorn thee:
The few, who loved thee once, have fled,
  And they who flatter scorn thee.
Thy midnight cup is pledged to slaves,
  No genial ties enwreath it;
The smiling there, like light on graves,
  Has rank cold hearts beneath it.
    Go--go--tho' worlds were thine,
      I would not now surrender
    One taintless tear of mine
      For all thy guilty splendor!

And days may come, thou false one! yet,
  When even those ties shall sever;
When thou wilt call, with vain regret,
  On her thou'st lost for ever;
On her who, in thy fortune's fall,
  With smiles had still received thee,
And gladly died to prove thee all
  Her fancy first believed thee.
    Go--go--'tis vain to curse,
      'Tis weakness to upbraid thee;
    Hate cannot wish thee worse
      Than guilt and shame have made thee.






WHILE HISTORY'S MUSE.


While History's Muse the memorial was keeping
  Of all that the dark hand of Destiny weaves,
Beside her the Genius of Erin stood weeping,
  For hers was the story that blotted the leaves.
But oh! how the tear in her eyelids grew bright,
When, after whole pages of sorrow and shame,
    She saw History write,
    With a pencil of light
That illumed the whole volume, her Wellington's name.

"Hail, Star of my Isle!" said the Spirit, all sparkling
  With beams, such as break from her own dewy skies--
"Thro' ages of sorrow, deserted and darkling,
  "I've watched for some glory like thine to arise.
"For, tho' heroes I've numbered, unblest was their lot,
"And unhallowed they sleep in the crossways of Fame;--
    "But oh! there is not
    "One dishonoring blot
"On the wreath that encircles my Wellington's name.

"Yet still the last crown of thy toils is remaining,
  "The grandest, the purest, even _thou_ hast yet known;
"Tho' proud was thy task, other nations unchaining,
  "Far prouder to heal the deep wounds of thy own.
"At the foot of that throne, for whose weal thou hast stood,
"Go, plead for the land that first cradled thy fame,
    "And, bright o'er the flood
    "Of her tears and her blood,
"Let the rainbow of Hope be her Wellington's name!"






THE TIME I'VE LOST IN WOOING.


The time I've lost in wooing,
In watching and pursuing
  The light, that lies
  In woman's eyes,
Has been my heart's undoing.
Tho' Wisdom oft has sought me,
I scorned the lore she brought me,
  My only books
  Were woman's looks,
And folly's all they've taught me.

Her smile when Beauty granted,
I hung with gaze enchanted,
  Like him the Sprite,[1]
  Whom maids by night
Oft meet in glen that's haunted.
Like him, too, Beauty won me,
But while her eyes were on me,
  If once their ray
  Was turned away,
O! winds could not outrun me.

And are those follies going?
And is my proud heart growing
  Too cold or wise
  For brilliant eyes
Again to set it glowing?
No, vain, alas! the endeavor
From bonds so sweet to sever;
  Poor Wisdom's chance
  Against a glance
Is now as weak as ever.


[1] This alludes to a kind of Irish fairy, which is to be met with, they
say, in the fields at dusk. As long as you keep your eyes upon him, he is
fixed, and in your power;--but the moment you look away (and he is
ingenious in furnishing some inducement) he vanishes. I had thought that
this was the sprite which we call the Leprechaun; but a high authority
upon such subjects, Lady Morgan, (in a note upon her national and
interesting novel, O'Donnel), has given a very different account of that
goblin.






WHERE IS THE SLAVE.


Oh, where's the slave so lowly,
Condemned to chains unholy,
  Who, could he burst
  His bonds at first,
Would pine beneath them slowly?
What soul, whose wrongs degrade it,
Would wait till time decayed it,
  When thus its wing
  At once may spring
To the throne of Him who made it?

Farewell, Erin.--farewell, all,
Who live to weep our fall!

Less dear the laurel growing,
Alive, untouched and blowing,
  Than that, whose braid
  Is plucked to shade
The brows with victory glowing
We tread the land that bore us,
Her green flag glitters o'er us,
  The friends we've tried
  Are by our side,
And the foe we hate before us.

Farewell, Erin,--farewell, all,
Who live to weep our fall!






COME, REST IN THIS BOSOM.


Come, rest in this bosom, my own stricken deer,
Tho' the herd have fled from thee, thy home is still here;
Here still is the smile, that no cloud can o'ercast,
And a heart and a hand all thy own to the last.

Oh! what was love made for, if 'tis not the same
Thro' joy and thro' torment, thro' glory and shame?
I know not, I ask not, if guilt's in that heart,
I but know that I love thee, whatever thou art.

Thou hast called me thy Angel in moments of bliss,
And thy Angel I'll be, mid the horrors of this,--
Thro' the furnace, unshrinking, thy steps to pursue,
And shield thee, and save thee,--or perish there too!






'TIS GONE, AND FOR EVER.


'Tis gone, and for ever, the light we saw breaking,
  Like Heaven's first dawn o'er the sleep of the dead--
When Man, from the slumber of ages awaking,
  Looked upward, and blest the pure ray, ere it fled.
'Tis gone, and the gleams it has left of its burning
But deepen the long night of bondage and mourning,
That dark o'er the kingdoms of earth is returning,
  And darkest of all, hapless Erin, o'er thee.

For high was thy hope, when those glories were darting
  Around thee, thro' all the gross clouds of the world;
When Truth, from her fetters indignantly starting,
  At once, like a Sun-burst, her banner unfurled.[1]
Oh! never shall earth see a moment so splendid!
Then, then--had one Hymn of Deliverance blended
The tongues of all nations--how sweet had ascended
  The first note of Liberty, Erin, from thee!

But, shame on those tyrants, who envied the blessing!
  And shame on the light race, unworthy its good,
Who, at Death's reeking altar, like furies, caressing
  The young hope of Freedom, baptized it in blood.
Then vanished for ever that fair, sunny vision,
Which, spite of the slavish, the cold heart's derision,
Shall long be remembered, pure, bright, and elysian,
  As first it arose, my lost Erin, on thee.


[1] "The Sun-burst" was the fanciful name given by the ancient Irish to
the Royal Banner.






I SAW FROM THE BEACH.


I saw from the beach, when the morning was shining,
  A bark o'er the waters move gloriously on;
I came when the sun o'er that beach was declining,
  The bark was still there, but the waters were gone.

And such is the fate of our life's early promise,
  So passing the spring-tide of joy we have known;
Each wave, that we danced on at morning, ebbs from us,
  And leaves us, at eve, on the bleak shore alone.

Ne'er tell me of glories, serenely adorning
  The close of our day, the calm eve of our night;--
Give me back, give me back the wild freshness of Morning,
  Her clouds and her tears are worth Evening's best light.

Oh, who would not welcome that moment's returning,
  When passion first waked a new life thro' his frame,
And his soul, like the wood, that grows precious in burning,
  Gave out all its sweets to love's exquisite flame.






FILL THE BUMPER FAIR.


Fill the bumper fair!
  Every drop we sprinkle
O'er the brow of Care
  Smooths away a wrinkle.
Wit's electric flame
  Ne'er so swiftly passes,
As when thro' the frame
  It shoots from brimming glasses.
Fill the bumper fair!
  Every drop we sprinkle
O'er the brow of Care
  Smooths away a wrinkle.

Sages can, they say,
  Grasp the lightning's pinions,
And bring down its ray
  From the starred dominions:--
So we, Sages, sit,
  And, mid bumpers brightening,
From the Heaven of Wit
  Draw down all its lightning.

Wouldst thou know what first
  Made our souls inherit
This ennobling thirst
  For wine's celestial spirit?
It chanced upon that day,
  When, as bards inform us,
Prometheus stole away
  The living fires that warm us:

The careless Youth, when up
  To Glory's fount aspiring,
Took nor urn nor cup
  To hide the pilfered fire in.--
But oh his joy, when, round
  The halls of Heaven spying,
Among the stars he found
  A bowl of Bacchus lying!

Some drops were in the bowl,
  Remains of last night's pleasure,
With which the Sparks of Soul
  Mixt their burning treasure.
Hence the goblet's shower
  Hath such spells to win us;
Hence its mighty power
  O'er that flame within us.
Fill the bumper fair!
  Every drop we sprinkle
O'er the brow of Care
  Smooths away a wrinkle.






DEAR HARP OF MY COUNTRY.


Dear Harp of my Country! in darkness I found thee,
  The cold chain of silence had hung o'er thee long,[1]
When proudly, my own Island Harp, I unbound thee,
  And gave all thy chords to light, freedom, and song!
The warm lay of love and the light note of gladness
  Have wakened thy fondest, thy liveliest thrill;
But, so oft hast thou echoed the deep sigh of sadness,
  That even in thy mirth it will steal from thee still.
Dear Harp of my country! farewell to thy numbers,
  This sweet wreath of song is the last we shall twine!
Go, sleep with the sunshine of Fame on thy slumbers,
  Till touched by some hand less unworthy than mine;
If the pulse of the patriot, soldier, or lover,
  Have throbbed at our lay, 'tis thy glory alone;
I was _but_ as the wind, passing heedlessly over,
  And all the wild sweetness I waked was thy own.


[1] The chain of Silence was a sort of practical figure of rhetoric among
the ancient Irish. Walker tells us of "a celebrated contention for
precedence between Finn and Gaul, near Finn's palace at Almhaim, where the
attending Bards anxious, if possible, to produce a cessation of
hostilities, shook the chain of Silence, and flung themselves among the
ranks."






MY GENTLE HARP.


My gentle harp, once more I waken
  The sweetness of thy slumbering strain;
In tears our last farewell was taken,
  And now in tears we meet again.
No light of joy hath o'er thee broken,
  But, like those Harps whose heavenly skill
Of slavery, dark as thine, hath spoken,
  Thou hang'st upon the willows still.

And yet, since last thy chord resounded,
  An hour of peace and triumph came,
And many an ardent bosom bounded
  With hopes--that now art turned to shame.
Yet even then, while Peace was singing
  Her halcyon song o'er land and sea,
Tho' joy and hope to others bringing,
  She only brought new tears to thee.

Then, who can ask for notes of pleasure,
  My drooping Harp, from chords like thine?
Alas, the lark's gay morning measure
  As ill would suit the swan's decline!
Or how shall I, who love, who bless thee,
  Invoke thy breath for Freedom's strains,
When even the wreaths in which I dress thee,
  Are sadly mixt--half flowers, half chains?

But come--if yet thy frame can borrow
  One breath of joy, oh, breathe for me,
And show the world, in chains and sorrow,
  How sweet thy music still can be;
How gaily, even mid gloom surrounding,
  Thou yet canst wake at pleasure's thrill--
Like Memnon's broken image sounding,
  Mid desolation tuneful still!






IN THE MORNING OF LIFE.


In the morning of life, when its cares are unknown,
  And its pleasures in all their new lustre begin,
When we live in a bright-beaming world of our own,
  And the light that surrounds us is all from within;
Oh 'tis not, believe me, in that happy time
  We can love, as in hours of less transport we may;--
Of our smiles, of our hopes, 'tis the gay sunny prime,
  But affection is truest when these fade away.

When we see the first glory of youth pass us by,
  Like a leaf on the stream that will never return;
When our cup, which had sparkled with pleasure so high,
  First tastes of the _other_, the dark-flowing urn;
Then, then is the time when affection holds sway
  With a depth and a tenderness joy never knew;
Love, nursed among pleasures, is faithless as they,
  But the love born of Sorrow, like Sorrow, is true.

In climes full of sunshine, tho' splendid the flowers,
  Their sighs have no freshness, their odor no worth;
'Tis the cloud and the mist of our own Isle of showers,
  That call the rich spirit of fragrancy forth.
So it is not mid splendor, prosperity, mirth,
  That the depth of Love's generous spirit appears;
To the sunshine of smiles it may first owe its birth,
  But the soul of its sweetness is drawn out by tears.






AS SLOW OUR SHIP.


As slow our ship her foamy track
  Against the wind was cleaving,
Her trembling pennant still looked back
  To that dear isle 'twas leaving.
So loathe we part from all we love.
  From all the links that bind us;
So turn our hearts as on we rove,
  To those we've left behind us.

When, round the bowl, of vanished years
  We talk, with joyous seeming,--
With smiles that might as well be tears,
  So faint, so sad their beaming;
While memory brings us back again
  Each early tie that twined us,
Oh, sweet's the cup that circles then
  To those we've left behind us.

And when, in other climes, we meet
  Some isle, or vale enchanting,
Where all looks flowery, wild, and sweet,
  And naught but love is wanting;
We think how great had been our bliss,
  If heaven had but assigned us
To live and die in scenes like this,
  With some we've left behind us!

As travellers oft look back at eve,
  When eastward darkly going,
To gaze upon that light they leave
  Still faint behind them glowing,--
So, when the close of pleasure's day
  To gloom hath near consigned us,
We turn to catch one fading ray
  Of joy that's left behind us.






WHEN COLD IN THE EARTH.


When cold in the earth lies the friend thou hast loved,
  Be his faults and his follies forgot by thee then;
Or, if from their slumber the veil be removed,
  Weep o'er them in silence, and close it again.
And oh! if 'tis pain to remember how far
  From the pathways of light he was tempted to roam,
Be it bliss to remember that thou wert the star
  That arose on his darkness and guided him home.

From thee and thy innocent beauty first came
  The revealings, that taught him true love to adore,
To feel the bright presence, and turn him with shame
  From the idols he blindly had knelt to before.
O'er the waves of a life, long benighted and wild,
  Thou camest, like a soft golden calm o'er the sea;
And if happiness purely and glowingly smiled
  On his evening horizon, the light was from thee.

And tho', sometimes, the shades of past folly might rise,
  And tho' falsehood again would allure him to stray,
He but turned to the glory that dwelt in those eyes,
  And the folly, the falsehood, soon vanished away.
As the Priests of the Sun, when their altar grew dim,
  At the day-beam alone could its lustre repair,
So, if virtue a moment grew languid in him,
  He but flew to that smile and rekindled it there.






REMEMBER THEE.


Remember thee? yes, while there's life in this heart,
It shall never forget thee, all lorn as thou art;
More dear in thy sorrow, thy gloom, and thy showers,
Than the rest of the world in their sunniest hours.

Wert thou all that I wish thee, great, glorious, and free,
First flower of the earth, and first gem of the sea,
I might hail thee with prouder, with happier brow,
But oh! could I love thee more deeply than now?

No, thy chains as they rankle, thy blood as it runs,
But make thee more painfully dear to thy sons--
Whose hearts, like the young of the desert-bird's nest,
Drink love in each life-drop that flows from thy breast.






WREATH THE BOWL.


  Wreath the bowl
  With flowers of soul,
The brightest wit can find us;
  We'll take a flight
  Towards heaven to-night,
And leave dull earth behind us.
  Should Love amid
  The wreaths be hid,
That joy, the enchanter, brings us,
  No danger fear,
  While wine is near,
We'll drown him if he stings us,
  Then, wreath the bowl
  With flowers of soul,
The brightest wit can find us;
  We'll take a flight
  Towards heaven to-night,
And leave dull earth behind us.

  'Twas nectar fed
  Of old, 'tis said,
Their Junos, Joves, Apollos;
  And man may brew
  His nectar too,
The rich receipt's as follows:
  Take wine like this,
  Let looks of bliss
Around it well be blended,
  Then bring wit's beam
  To warm the stream,
And there's your nectar, splendid!
  So wreath the bowl
  With flowers of soul,
The brightest wit can find us;
  We'll take a flight
  Towards heaven to-night,
And leave dull earth behind us.

  Say, why did Time
  His glass sublime
Fill up with sands unsightly,
  When wine, he knew,
  Runs brisker through,
And sparkles far more brightly?
  Oh, lend it us,
  And, smiling thus,
The glass in two we'll sever,
  Make pleasure glide
  In double tide,
And fill both ends for ever!
  Then wreath the bowl
  With flowers of soul
The brightest wit can find us;
  We'll take a flight
  Towards heaven to-night,
And leave dull earth behind us.






WHENE'ER I SEE THOSE SMILING EYES.


Whene'er I see those smiling eyes,
  So full of hope, and joy, and light,
As if no cloud could ever rise,
  To dim a heaven so purely bright--
I sigh to think how soon that brow
  In grief may lose its every ray,
And that light heart, so joyous now,
  Almost forget it once was gay.

For time will come with all its blights,
  The ruined hope, the friend unkind,
And love, that leaves, where'er it lights,
  A chilled or burning heart behind:--
While youth, that now like snow appears,
  Ere sullied by the darkening rain,
When once 'tis touched by sorrow's tears
  Can ever shine so bright again.






IF THOU'LT BE MINE.


If thou'lt be mine, the treasures of air,
  Of earth, and sea, shall lie at thy feet;
Whatever in Fancy's eye looks fair,
  Or in Hope's sweet music sounds _most_ sweet,
Shall be ours--if thou wilt be mine, love!

Bright flowers shall bloom wherever we rove,
  A voice divine shall talk in each stream;
The stars shall look like worlds of love,
  And this earth be all one beautiful dream
    In our eyes--if thou wilt be mine, love!

And thoughts, whose source is hidden and high,
  Like streams, that come from heavenward hills,
Shall keep our hearts, like meads, that lie
  To be bathed by those eternal rills,
  Ever green, if thou wilt be mine, love!

All this and more the Spirit of Love
  Can breathe o'er them, who feel his spells;
That heaven, which forms his home above,
  He can make on earth, wherever he dwells,
    As thou'lt own.--if thou wilt be mine, love!






TO LADIES' EYES.


To Ladies' eyes around, boy,
  We can't refuse, we can't refuse,
Tho' bright eyes so abound, boy,
  'Tis hard to choose, 'tis hard to choose.
For thick as stars that lighten
  Yon airy bowers, yon airy bowers,
The countless eyes that brighten
  This earth of ours, this earth of ours.
But fill the cup--where'er, boy,
  Our choice may fall, our choice may fall,
We're sure to find Love there, boy,
  So drink them all! so drink them all!

Some looks there are so holy,
  They seem but given, they seem but given,
As shining beacons, solely,
  To light to heaven, to light to heaven.
While some--oh! ne'er believe them--
  With tempting ray, with tempting ray,
Would lead us (God forgive them!)
  The other way, the other way.
But fill the cup--where'er, boy,
  Our choice may fall, our choice may fall,
We're sure to find Love there, boy,
  So drink them all! so drink them all!

In some, as in a mirror,
  Love seems portrayed, Love seems portrayed,
But shun the flattering error,
  'Tis but his shade, 'tis but his shade.
Himself has fixt his dwelling
  In eyes we know, in eyes we know,
And lips--but this is telling--
  So here they go! so here they go!
Fill up, fill up--where'er, boy,
  Our choice may fall, our choice may fall,
We're sure to find Love there, boy,
  So drink them all! so drink them all!






FORGET NOT THE FIELD.


Forget not the field where they perished,
  The truest, the last of the brave,
All gone--and the bright hope we cherished
  Gone with them, and quenched in their grave!

Oh! could we from death but recover
  Those hearts as they bounded before,
In the face of high heaven to fight over
  That combat for freedom once more;--

Could the chain for an instant be riven
  Which Tyranny flung round us then,
No, 'tis not in Man, nor in Heaven,
  To let Tyranny bind it again!

But 'tis past--and, tho' blazoned in story
  The name of our Victor may be,
Accurst is the march of that glory
  Which treads o'er the hearts of the free.

Far dearer the grave or the prison,
  Illumed by one patriot name,
Than the trophies of all, who have risen
  On Liberty's ruins to fame.






THEY MAY RAIL AT THIS LIFE.


They may rail at this life--from the hour I began it,
  I found it a life full of kindness and bliss;
And, until they can show me some happier planet,
  More social and bright, I'll content me with this.
As long as the world has such lips and such eyes,
  As before me this moment enraptured I see,
They may say what they will of their orbs in the skies,
  But this earth is the planet for you, love, and me.

In Mercury's star, where each moment can bring them
  New sunshine and wit from the fountain on high,
Tho' the nymphs may have livelier poets to sing them,
  They've none, even there, more enamored than I.
And as long as this harp can be wakened to love,
  And that eye its divine inspiration shall be,
They may talk as they will of their Edens above,
  But this earth is the planet for you, love, and me.

In that star of the west, by whose shadowy splendor,
  At twilight so often we've roamed thro' the dew,
There are maidens, perhaps, who have bosoms as tender,
  And look, in their twilights, as lovely as you.
But tho' they were even more bright than the queen
  Of that isle they inhabit in heaven's blue sea,
As I never those fair young celestials have seen,
  Why--this earth is the planet for you, love, and me.

As for those chilly orbs on the verge of creation,
  Where sunshine and smiles must be equally rare,
Did they want a supply of cold hearts for that station,
  Heaven knows we have plenty on earth we could spare,
Oh! think what a world we should have of it here,
  If the haters of peace, of affection and glee,
Were to fly up to Saturn's comfortless sphere,
  And leave earth to such spirits as you, love, and me.






OH FOR THE SWORDS OF FORMER TIME!


Oh for the swords of former time!
  Oh for the men who bore them,
When armed for Right, they stood sublime,
  And tyrants crouched before them:
When free yet, ere courts began
 With honors to enslave him,
The best honors worn by Man
 Were those which Virtue gave him.
Oh for the swords, etc.

Oh for the kings who flourished then!
  Oh for the pomp that crowned them,
When hearts and hands of freeborn men
  Were all the ramparts round them.
When, safe built on bosoms true,
  The throne was but the centre,
Round which Love a circle drew,
  That Treason durst not enter.
Oh for the kings who flourished then!
  Oh for the pomp that crowned them,
When hearts and hands of freeborn men
  Were all the ramparts round them!






ST. SENANUS AND THE LADY.


ST. SENANUS.[1]

"Oh! haste and leave this sacred isle,
Unholy bark, ere morning smile;
For on thy deck, though dark it be,
  A female form I see;
And I have sworn this sainted sod
Shall ne'er by woman's feet be trod."

THE LADY.

"Oh! Father, send not hence my bark,
Thro' wintry winds and billows dark:
I come with humble heart to share
  Thy morn and evening prayer;
Nor mine the feet, oh! holy Saint,
The brightness of thy sod to taint."

The Lady's prayer Senanus spurned;
The winds blew fresh, the bark returned;
But legends hint, that had the maid
  Till morning's light delayed,
And given the saint one rosy smile,
She ne'er had left his lonely isle.


[1] In a metrical life of St. Senanus, which is taken from an old Kilkenny
MS., and may be found among the "_Acta Sanctorum Hiberniae_," we are told
of his flight to the island of Scattery, and his resolution not to admit
any woman of the party; he refused to receive even a sister saint, St.
Cannera, whom an angel had taken to the island for the express purpose of
introducing her to him.






NE'ER ASK THE HOUR.

Ne'er ask the hour--what is it to us
  How Time deals out his treasures?
The golden moments lent us thus,
  Are not _his_ coin, but Pleasure's.
If counting them o'er could add to their blisses,
  I'd number each glorious second:
But moments of joy are, like Lesbia's kisses,
  Too quick and sweet to be reckoned.
Then fill the cup--what is it to us
  How time his circle measures?
The fairy hours we call up thus,
  Obey no wand but Pleasure's.

Young Joy ne'er thought of counting hours,
  Till Care, one summer's morning,
Set up, among his smiling flowers,
  A dial, by way of warning.
But Joy loved better to gaze on the sun,
  As long as its light was glowing,
Than to watch with old Care how the shadows stole on,
  And how fast that light was going.
So fill the cup--what is it to us
  How Time his circle measures?
The fairy hours we call up thus,
  Obey no wand but Pleasure's.






SAIL ON, SAIL ON.


Sail on, sail on, thou fearless bark--
  Wherever blows the welcome wind,
It cannot lead to scenes more dark,
  More sad than those we leave behind.
Each wave that passes seems to say,
  "Tho' death beneath our smile may be,
  Less cold we are, less false than they,
  Whose smiling wrecked thy hopes and thee."
Sail on, sail on,--thro' endless space--
  Thro' calm--thro' tempest--stop no more:
The stormiest sea's a resting place
  To him who leaves such hearts on shore.
Or--if some desert land we meet,
  Where never yet false-hearted men
Profaned a world, that else were sweet,--
  Then rest thee, bark, but not till then.






THE PARALLEL.


Yes, sad one of Sion,[1] if closely resembling,
  In shame and in sorrow, thy withered-up heart--
If drinking deep, deep, of the same "cup of trembling"
  Could make us thy children, our parent thou art,

Like thee doth our nation lie conquered and broken,
  And fallen from her head is the once royal crown;
In her streets, in her halls, Desolation hath spoken,
  And "while it is day yet, her sun hath gone down."[2]

Like thine doth her exile, mid dreams of returning,
  Die far from the home it were life to behold;
Like thine do her sons, in the day of their mourning,
  Remember the bright things that blest them of old.

Ah, well may we call her, like thee "the Forsaken,"[3]
  Her boldest are vanquished, her proudest are slaves;
And the harps of her minstrels, when gayest they waken,
  Have tones mid their mirth like the wind over graves!

Yet hadst thou thy vengeance--yet came there the morrow,
  That shines out, at last, on the longest dark night,
When the sceptre, that smote thee with slavery and sorrow,
  Was shivered at once, like a reed, in thy sight.

When that cup, which for others the proud Golden City[4]
  Had brimmed full of bitterness, drenched her own lips;
And the world she had trampled on heard, without pity,
  The howl in her halls, and the cry from her ships.

When the curse Heaven keeps for the haughty came over
  Her merchants rapacious, her rulers unjust,
And, a ruin, at last, for the earthworm to cover,[5]
  The Lady of Kingdoms[6] lay low in the dust.


[1] These verses were written after the perusal of a treatise by Mr.
Hamilton, professing to prove that the Irish were originally Jews.

[2] 1 "Her sun is gone down while it was yet day."--_Jer_. xv. 9.

[3] "Thou shalt no more be termed Forsaken."--_Isaiah_, lxii. 4.

[4] "How hath the oppressor ceased! the golden city ceased!"--
_Isaiah_, xiv. 4.

[5] "Thy pomp is brought down to the grave . . . and the worms cover
thee."--_Isaiah_, xiv. 11.

[6] "Thou shalt no more be called the Lady of Kingdoms."--_Isaiah_,
xlvil. 5.






DRINK OF THIS CUP.


Drink of this cup;--you'll find there's a spell in
  Its every drop 'gainst the ills of mortality;
Talk of the cordial that sparkled for Helen!
  Her cup was a fiction, but this is reality.
Would you forget the dark world we are in,
  Just taste of the bubble that gleams on the top of it;
But would you rise above earth, till akin
  To Immortals themselves, you must drain every drop of it;
Send round the cup--for oh there's a spell in
  Its every drop 'gainst the ills of mortality;
Talk of the cordial that sparkled for Helen!
  Her cup was a fiction, but this is reality.

Never was philter formed with such power
  To charm and bewilder as this we are quaffing;
Its magic began when, in Autumn's rich hour,
  A harvest of gold in the fields it stood laughing.
There having, by Nature's enchantment, been filled
  With the balm and the bloom of her kindliest weather,
This wonderful juice from its core was distilled
  To enliven such hearts as are here brought together.
Then drink of the cup--you'll find there's a spell in
  Its every drop 'gainst the ills of mortality;
Talk of the cordial that sparkled for Helen!
  Her cup was a fiction, but this is reality.

And tho' perhaps--but breathe it to no one--
  Like liquor the witch brews at midnight so awful,
This philter in secret was first taught to flow on,
  Yet 'tisn't less potent for being unlawful.
And, even tho' it taste of the smoke of that flame,
  Which in silence extracted its virtue forbidden--
Fill up--there's a fire in some hearts I could name,
  Which may work too its charm, tho' as lawless and hidden.
So drink of the cup--for oh there's a spell in
  Its every drop 'gainst the ills of mortality;
Talk of the cordial that sparkled for Helen!
  Her cup was a fiction, but this is reality.






THE FORTUNE-TELLER.


Down in the valley come meet me to-night,
  And I'll tell you your fortune truly
As ever 'twas told, by the new-moon's light,
  To a young maiden, shining as newly.

But, for the world, let no one be nigh,
  Lest haply the stars should deceive me;
Such secrets between you and me and the sky
  Should never go farther, believe me.

If at that hour the heavens be not dim,
  My science shall call up before you
A male apparition,--the image of him
  Whose destiny 'tis to adore you.

And if to that phantom you'll be kind,
  So fondly around you he'll hover,
You'll hardly, my dear, any difference find
  'Twixt him and a true living lover.

Down at your feet, in the pale moonlight,
  He'll kneel, with a warmth of devotion--
An ardor, of which such an innocent sprite
  You'd scarcely believe had a notion.

What other thoughts and events may arise,
  As in destiny's book I've not seen them,
Must only be left to the stars and your eyes
  To settle, ere morning, between them.






OH, YE DEAD!


Oh, ye Dead! oh, ye Dead![1] whom we know by the light you give
From your cold gleaming eyes, tho' you move like men who live,
  Why leave you thus your graves,
  In far off fields and waves,
Where the worm and the sea-bird only know your bed,
  To haunt this spot where all
  Those eyes that wept your fall,
And the hearts that wailed you, like your own, lie dead?

It is true, it is true, we are shadows cold and wan;
And the fair and the brave whom we loved on earth are gone;
  But still thus even in death,
  So sweet the living breath
Of the fields and the flowers in our youth we wander'd o'er,
  That ere, condemned, we go
  To freeze mid Hecla's snow,
We would taste it awhile, and think we live once more!


[1] Paul Zealand mentions that there is a mountain in some part of
Ireland, where the ghosts of persons who have died in foreign lands walk
about and converse with those they meet, like living people. If asked why
they do not return to their homes, they say they are obliged to go to
Mount Hecla, and disappear immediately.






O'DONOHUE'S MISTRESS.


Of all the fair months, that round the sun
In light-linked dance their circles run,
  Sweet May, shine thou for me;
For still, when thy earliest beams arise,
That youth, who beneath the blue lake lies,
  Sweet May, returns to me.

Of all the bright haunts, where daylight leaves
Its lingering smile on golden eyes,
  Fair Lake, thou'rt dearest to me;
For when the last April sun grows dim,
Thy Naads prepare his steed[1] for him
  Who dwells, bright Lake, in thee.

Of all the proud steeds, that ever bore
Young plumed Chiefs on sea or shore,
  White Steed, most joy to thee;
Who still, with the first young glance of spring,
From under that glorious lake dost bring
  My love, my chief, to me.

While, white as the sail some bark unfurls,
When newly launched, thy long mane[2] curls,
  Fair Steed, as white and free;
And spirits, from all the lake's deep bowers,
Glide o'er the blue wave scattering flowers,
  Around my love and thee.

Of all the sweet deaths that maidens die,
Whose lovers beneath the cold wave lie,
  Most sweet that death will be,
Which, under the next May evening's light,
When thou and thy steed are lost to sight,
Dear love, I'll die for thee.


[1] The particulars of the tradition respecting Donohue and his White
Horse, may be found in Mr. Weld's Account of Killarney, or more fully
detailed in Derrick's Letters. For many years after his death, the spirit
of this hero is supposed to have been seen on the morning of Mayday,
gliding over the lake on his favorite white horse to the sound of sweet
unearthly music, and preceded by groups of youths and maidens, who flung
wreaths of delicate spring flowers in his path.

[2] The boatmen at Killarney call those waves which come on a windy day,
crested with foam, "O'Donohue's White Horses."






ECHO.


How sweet the answer Echo makes
  To music at night,
When, roused by lute or horn, she wakes,
And far away, o'er lawns and lakes,
  Goes answering light.

Yet Love hath echoes truer far,
  And far more sweet,
Than e'er beneath the moonlight star,
Of horn or lute, or soft guitar,
  The songs repeat.

'Tis when the sigh, in youth sincere,
  And only then,--
The sigh that's breath'd for one to hear,
Is by that one, that only dear,
  Breathed back again!






OH BANQUET NOT.


Oh banquet not in those shining bowers,
  Where Youth resorts, but come to me:
For mine's a garden of faded flowers,
  More fit for sorrow, for age, and thee.
And there we shall have our feast of tears,
  And many a cup in silence pour;
Our guests, the shades of former years,
  Our toasts to lips that bloom no more.

There, while the myrtle's withering boughs
  Their lifeless leaves around us shed,
We'll brim the bowl to broken vows,
  To friends long lost, the changed, the dead.
Or, while some blighted laurel waves
  Its branches o'er the dreary spot,
We'll drink to those neglected graves,
  Where valor sleeps, unnamed, forgot.






THEE, THEE, ONLY THEE.


The dawning of morn, the daylight's sinking,
The night's long hours still find me thinking
    Of thee, thee, only thee.
When friends are met, and goblets crowned,
  And smiles are near, that once enchanted,
Unreached by all that sunshine round,
  My soul, like some dark spot, is haunted
    By thee, thee, only thee.

Whatever in fame's high path could waken
My spirit once, is now forsaken
    For thee, thee, only thee.
Like shores, by which some headlong bark
  To the ocean hurries, resting never,
Life's scenes go by me, bright or dark,
  I know not, heed not, hastening ever
    To thee, thee, only thee.

I have not a joy but of thy bringing,
And pain itself seems sweet when springing
    From thee, thee, only thee.
Like spells, that naught on earth can break,
  Till lips, that know the charm, have spoken,
This heart, howe'er the world may wake
  Its grief, its scorn, can but be broken
    By thee, thee, only thee.






SHALL THE HARP THEN BE SILENT.


Shall the Harp then be silent, when he who first gave
  To our country a name, is withdrawn from all eyes?
Shall a Minstrel of Erin stand mute by the grave,
  Where the first--where the last of her Patriots lies?

No--faint tho' the death-song may fall from his lips,
  Tho' his Harp, like his soul, may with shadows be crost,
Yet, yet shall it sound, mid a nation's eclipse,
  And proclaim to the world what a star hath been lost;--[1]

What a union of all the affections and powers
  By which life is exalted, embellished, refined,
Was embraced in that spirit--whose centre was ours,
  While its mighty circumference circled mankind.

Oh, who that loves Erin, or who that can see,
  Thro' the waste of her annals, that epoch sublime--
Like a pyramid raised in the desert--where he
  And his glory stand out to the eyes of all time;

That _one_ lucid interval, snatched from the gloom
  And the madness of ages, when filled with his soul,
A Nation o'erleaped the dark bounds of her doom,
  And for _one_ sacred instant, touched Liberty's goal?

Who, that ever hath heard him--hath drank at the source
  Of that wonderful eloquence, all Erin's own,
In whose high-thoughted daring, the fire, and the force,
  And the yet untamed spring of her spirit are shown?

An eloquence rich, wheresoever its wave
  Wandered free and triumphant, with thoughts that shone thro',
As clear as the brook's "stone of lustre," and gave,
  With the flash of the gem, its solidity too.

Who, that ever approached him, when free from the crowd,
  In a home full of love, he delighted to tread
'Mong the trees which a nation had given, and which bowed,
  As if each brought a new civic crown for his head--

Is there one, who hath thus, thro' his orbit of life
  But at distance observed him--thro' glory, thro' blame,
In the calm of retreat, in the grandeur of strife,
  Whether shining or clouded, still high and the same,--

Oh no, not a heart, that e'er knew him, but mourns
  Deep, deep o'er the grave, where such glory is shrined--
O'er a monument Fame will preserve, 'mong the urns
  Of the wisest, the bravest, the best of mankind!


[1] These lines were written on the death of our great patriot, Grattan,
in the year 1820. It is only the two first verses that are either intended
or fitted to be sung.






OH, THE SIGHT ENTRANCING.


Oh, the sight entrancing,
When morning's beam is glancing,
    O'er files arrayed
    With helm and blade,
And plumes, in the gay wind dancing!
When hearts are all high beating,
And the trumpet's voice repeating
    That song, whose breath
    May lead to death,
But never to retreating.
Oh the sight entrancing,
When morning's beam is glancing
  O'er files arrayed
  With helm and blade,
And plumes, in the gay wind dancing.

Yet, 'tis not helm or feather--
For ask yon despot, whether
  His plumed bands
  Could bring such hands
And hearts as ours together.
Leave pomps to those who need 'em--
Give man but heart and freedom,
  And proud he braves
  The gaudiest slaves
That crawl where monarchs lead 'em.
The sword may pierce the beaver,
Stone walls in time may sever,
  'Tis mind alone,
  Worth steel and stone,
That keeps men free for ever.
Oh that sight entrancing,
When the morning's beam is glancing,
  O'er files arrayed
  With helm and blade,
And in Freedom's cause advancing!






SWEET INNISFALLEN.


Sweet Innisfallen, fare thee well,
  May calm and sunshine long be thine!
How fair thou art let others tell,--
  To _feel_ how fair shall long be mine.

Sweet Innisfallen, long shall dwell
  In memory's dream that sunny smile,
Which o'er thee on that evening fell,
  When first I saw thy fairy isle.

'Twas light, indeed, too blest for one,
  Who had to turn to paths of care--
Through crowded haunts again to run,
  And leave thee bright and silent there;

No more unto thy shores to come,
  But, on the world's rude ocean tost,
Dream of thee sometimes, as a home
  Of sunshine he had seen and lost.

Far better in thy weeping hours
  To part from thee, as I do now,
When mist is o'er thy blooming bowers,
  Like sorrow's veil on beauty's brow.

For, though unrivalled still thy grace,
  Thou dost not look, as then, _too_ blest,
But thus in shadow, seem'st a place
  Where erring man might hope to rest--

Might hope to rest, and find in thee
  A gloom like Eden's on the day
He left its shade, when every tree,
  Like thine, hung weeping o'er his way.

Weeping or smiling, lovely isle!
  And all the lovelier for thy tears--
For tho' but rare thy sunny smile,
  'Tis heaven's own glance when it appears.

Like feeling hearts, whose joys are few,
  But, when _indeed_ they come divine--
The brightest light the sun e'er threw
  Is lifeless to one gleam of thine!






'TWAS ONE OF THOSE DREAMS.[1]


'Twas one of those dreams, that by music are brought,
Like a bright summer haze, o'er the poet's warm thought--
When, lost in the future, his soul wanders on,
And all of this life, but its sweetness, is gone.

The wild notes he heard o'er the water were those
He had taught to sing Erin's dark bondage and woes,
And the breath of the bugle now wafted them o'er
From Dinis' green isle, to Glen's wooded shore.

He listened--while, high o'er the eagle's rude nest,
The lingering sounds on their way loved to rest;
And the echoes sung back from their full mountain choir,
As if loath to let song so enchanting expire.

It seemed as if every sweet note, that died here,
Was again brought to life in some airier sphere,
Some heaven in those hills, where the soul of the strain
They had ceased upon earth was awaking again!

Oh forgive, if, while listening to music, whose breath
Seemed to circle his name with a charm against death,
He should feel a proud Spirit within him proclaim,
"Even so shalt thou live in the echoes of Fame:

"Even so, tho' thy memory should now die away,
'Twill be caught up again in some happier day,
And the hearts and the voices of Erin prolong,
Through the answering Future, thy name and thy song."


[1] Written during a visit to Lord Kenmare, at Killarney.






FAIREST! PUT ON AWHILE.


Fairest! put on awhile
  These pinions of light I bring thee,
And o'er thy own green isle
  In fancy let me wing thee.
Never did Ariel's plume,
  At golden sunset hover
O'er scenes so full of bloom,
  As I shall waft thee over.

Fields, where the Spring delays
  And fearlessly meets the ardor
Of the warm Summer's gaze,
  With only her tears to guard her.
Rocks, thro' myrtle boughs
  In grace majestic frowning;
Like some bold warrior's brows
  That Love hath just been crowning.

Islets, so freshly fair,
  That never hath bird come nigh them,
But from his course thro' air
  He hath been won down by them;--[1]
Types, sweet maid, of thee,
  Whose look, whose blush inviting,
Never did Love yet see
  From Heaven, without alighting.

Lakes, where the pearl lies hid,[2]
  And caves, where the gem is sleeping,
Bright as the tears thy lid
  Lets fall in lonely weeping.
Glens,[3] where Ocean comes,
  To 'scape the wild wind's rancor,
And harbors, worthiest homes
  Where Freedom's fleet can anchor.

Then, if, while scenes so grand,
  So beautiful, shine before thee,
Pride for thy own dear land
  Should haply be stealing o'er thee,
Oh, let grief come first,
  O'er pride itself victorious--
Thinking how man hath curst
  What Heaven had made so glorious!


[1] In describing the Skeligs (islands of the Barony of Forth), Dr.
Keating says, "There is a certain attractive virtue in the soil which
draws down all the birds that attempt to fly over it, and obliges them to
light upon the rock."

[2] "Nennius, a British writer of the ninth century, mentions the
abundance of pearls in Ireland. Their princes, he says, hung them behind
their ears: and this we find confirmed by a present made A.C. 1094, by
Gilbert, Bishop of Limerick, to Anselm, Archbishop of Canterbury, of a
considerable quantity of Irish pearls."--_O'Halloran_.

[3] Glengariff.






QUICK! WE HAVE BUT A SECOND.


Quick! we have but a second,
  Fill round the cup, while you may;
For Time, the churl, hath beckoned,
  And we must away, away!
Grasp the pleasure that's flying,
  For oh, not Orpheus' strain
Could keep sweet hours from dying,
  Or charm them to life again.
    Then, quick! we have but a second,
      Fill round the cup while you may;
    For Time, the churl, hath beckoned,
      And we must away, away!

See the glass, how it flushes.
  Like some young Hebe's lip,
And half meets thine, and blushes
  That thou shouldst delay to sip.
Shame, oh shame unto thee,
  If ever thou see'st that day,
When a cup or lip shall woo thee,
  And turn untouched away!
    Then, quick! we have but a second,
      Fill round, fill round, while you may;
    For Time, the churl, hath beckoned,
      And we must away, away!






AND DOTH NOT A MEETING LIKE THIS.


And doth not a meeting like this make amends,
  For all the long years I've been wandering away--
To see thus around me my youth's early friends,
  As smiling and kind as in that happy day?
Tho' haply o'er some of your brows, as o'er mine,
  The snow-fall of time may be stealing--what then?
Like Alps in the sunset, thus lighted by wine,
  We'll wear the gay tinge of youth's roses again.

What softened remembrances come o'er the heart,
  In gazing on those we've been lost to so long!
The sorrows, the joys, of which once they were part,
  Still round them, like visions of yesterday, throng,
As letters some hand hath invisibly traced,
  When held to the flame will steal out on the sight,
So many a feeling, that long seemed effaced,
  The warmth of a moment like this brings to light.

And thus, as in memory's bark we shall glide,
  To visit the scenes of our boyhood anew,
Tho' oft we may see, looking down on the tide,
  The wreck of full many a hope shining thro';
Yet still, as in fancy we point to the flowers,
  That once made a garden of all the gay shore,
Deceived for a moment, we'll think them still ours,
 And breathe the fresh air of life's morning once more.

So brief our existence, a glimpse, at the most,
  Is all we can have of the few we hold dear;
And oft even joy is unheeded and lost,
  For want of some heart, that could echo it, near.
Ah, well may we hope, when this short life is gone,
  To meet in some world of more permanent bliss,
For a smile, or a grasp of the hand, hastening on,
  Is all we enjoy of each other in this.

But, come, the more rare such delights to the heart,
  The more we should welcome and bless them the more;
They're ours, when we meet,--they are lost when we part,
  Like birds that bring summer, and fly when 'tis o'er.
Thus circling the cup, hand in hand, ere we drink,
  Let Sympathy pledge us, thro' pleasure, thro' pain,
That, fast as a feeling but touches one link,
  Her magic shall send it direct thro' the chain.






THE MOUNTAIN SPRITE.


In yonder valley there dwelt, alone,
A youth, whose moments had calmly flown,
Till spells came o'er him, and, day and night,
He was haunted and watched by a Mountain Sprite.

As once, by moonlight, he wander'd o'er
The golden sands of that island shore,
A foot-print sparkled before his sight--
'Twas the fairy foot of the Mountain Sprite!

Beside a fountain, one sunny day,
As bending over the stream he lay,
There peeped down o'er him two eyes of light,
And he saw in that mirror the Mountain Sprite.

He turned, but, lo, like a startled bird,
That spirit fled!--and the youth but heard
Sweet music, such as marks the flight
Of some bird of song, from the Mountain Sprite.

One night, still haunted by that bright look,
The boy, bewildered, his pencil took,
And, guided only by memory's light,
Drew the once-seen form of the Mountain Sprite.

"Oh thou, who lovest the shadow," cried
A voice, low whispering by his side,
"Now turn and see,"--here the youth's delight
Sealed the rosy lips of the Mountain Sprite.

"Of all the Spirits of land and sea,"
Then rapt he murmured, "there's none like thee,
"And oft, oh oft, may thy foot thus light
"In this lonely bower, sweet Mountain Sprite!"






AS VANQUISHED ERIN.


As vanquished Erin wept beside
  The Boyne's ill-fated river,
She saw where Discord, in the tide,
  Had dropt his loaded quiver.
"Lie hid," she cried, "ye venomed darts,
  "Where mortal eye may shun you;
"Lie hid--the stain of manly hearts,
  "That bled for me, is on you."

But vain her wish, her weeping vain,--
  As Time too well hath taught her--
Each year the Fiend returns again,
  And dives into that water;
And brings, triumphant, from beneath
  His shafts of desolation,
And sends them, winged with worse than death,
  Through all her maddening nation.

Alas for her who sits and mourns,
  Even now, beside that river--
Unwearied still the Fiend returns,
  And stored is still his quiver.
"When will this end, ye Powers of Good?"
  She weeping asks for ever;
But only hears, from out that flood,
  The Demon answer, "Never!"






DESMOND'S SONG.[1]


By the Feal's wave benighted,
  No star in the skies,
To thy door by Love lighted,
  I first saw those eyes.
Some voice whispered o'er me,
  As the threshold I crost,
There was ruin before me,
  If I loved, I was lost.

Love came, and brought sorrow
  Too soon in his train;
Yet so sweet, that to-morrow
  'Twere welcome again.
Though misery's full measure
  My portion should be,
I would drain it with pleasure,
  If poured out by thee.

You, who call it dishonor
  To bow to this flame,
If you've eyes, look but on her,
  And blush while you blame.
Hath the pearl less whiteness
  Because of its birth?
Hath the violet less brightness
  For growing near earth?

No--Man for his glory
  To ancestry flies;
But Woman's bright story
  Is told in her eyes.

While the Monarch but traces
  Thro' mortals his line,
Beauty, born of the Graces,
  Banks next to Divine!


[1] "Thomas, the heir of the Desmond family, had accidentally been so
engaged in the chase, that he was benighted near Tralee, and obliged to
take shelter at the Abbey of Feal, in the house of one of his dependents,
called Mac Cormac. Catherine, a beautiful daughter of his host, instantly
inspired the Earl with a violent passion, which he could not subdue. He
married her, and by this inferior alliance alienated his followers, whose
brutal pride regarded this indulgence of his love as an unpardonable
degradation of his family."--_Leland_, vol. ii.






THEY KNOW NOT MY HEART.


They know not my heart, who believe there can be
One stain of this earth in its feelings for thee;
Who think, while I see thee in beauty's young hour,
As pure as the morning's first dew on the flower,
I could harm what I love,--as the sun's wanton ray
But smiles on the dew-drop to waste it away.

No--beaming with light as those young features are,
There's a light round thy heart which is lovelier far:
It is not that cheek--'tis the soul dawning clear
Thro' its innocent blush makes thy beauty so dear:
As the sky we look up to, tho' glorious and fair,
Is looked up to the more, because Heaven lies there!






I WISH I WAS BY THAT DIM LAKE.


I wish I was by that dim Lake,[1]
Where sinful souls their farewell take
Of this vain world, and half-way lie
In death's cold shadow, ere they die.
There, there, far from thee,
Deceitful world, my home should be;
Where, come what might of gloom and pain,
False hope should ne'er deceive again.

The lifeless sky, the mournful sound
Of unseen waters falling round;
The dry leaves, quivering o'er my head,
Like man, unquiet even when dead!
These, ay, these shall wean
My soul from life's deluding scene,
And turn each thought, o'ercharged with gloom,
Like willows, downward towards the tomb.

As they, who to their couch at night
Would win repose, first quench the light,
So must the hopes, that keep this breast
Awake, be quenched, ere it can rest.
Cold, cold, this heart must grow,
Unmoved by either joy or woe,
Like freezing founts, where all that's thrown
Within their current turns to stone.


[1] These verses are meant to allude to that ancient haunt of
superstition, called Patrick's Purgatory. "In the midst of these gloomy
regions of Donegall (says Dr. Campbell) lay a lake, which was to become
the mystic theatre of this fabled and intermediate state. In the lake were
several islands; but one of them was dignified with that called the Mouth
of Purgatory, which, during the dark ages, attracted the notice of all
Christendom, and was the resort of penitents and pilgrims from almost
every country in Europe."






SHE SUNG OF LOVE.


She sung of Love, while o'er her lyre
  The rosy rays of evening fell,
As if to feed with their soft fire
  The soul within that trembling shell.
The same rich light hung o'er her cheek,
  And played around those lips that sung
And spoke, as flowers would sing and speak,
  If Love could lend their leaves a tongue.

But soon the West no longer burned,
  Each rosy ray from heaven withdrew;
And, when to gaze again I turned,
  The minstrel's form seemed fading too.
As if _her_ light and heaven's were one,
  The glory all had left that frame;
And from her glimmering lips the tone,
  As from a parting spirit, came.

Who ever loved, but had the thought
  That he and all he loved must part?
Filled with this fear, I flew and caught
  The fading image to my heart--
And cried, "Oh Love! is this thy doom?
  "Oh light of youth's resplendent day!
"Must ye then lose your golden bloom,
  "And thus, like sunshine, die away?"






SING--SING--MUSIC WAS GIVEN.


Sing--sing--Music was given,
  To brighten the gay, and kindle the loving;
Souls here, like planets in Heaven,
  By harmony's laws alone are kept moving.
Beauty may boast of her eyes and her cheeks,
  But Love from the lips his true archery wings;
And she, who but feathers the dart when she speaks,
  At once sends it home to the heart when she sings.
  Then sing--sing--Music was given,
    To brighten the gay, and kindle the loving;
  Souls here, like planets in Heaven,
    By harmony's laws alone are kept moving.

When Love, rocked by his mother,
  Lay sleeping as calm as slumber could make him,
"Hush, hush," said Venus, "no other
  "Sweet voice but his own is worthy to wake him."
Dreaming of music he slumbered the while
  Till faint from his lip a soft melody broke,
And Venus, enchanted, looked on with a smile,
  While Love to his own sweet singing awoke.
  Then sing--sing--Music was given,
    To brighten the gay, and kindle the loving;
  Souls here, like planets in Heaven,
    By harmony's laws alone are kept moving.






THO' HUMBLE THE BANQUET.


Tho' humble the banquet to which I invite thee,
  Thou'lt find there the best a poor bard can command:
Eyes, beaming with welcome, shall throng round, to light thee,
  And Love serve the feast with his own willing hand.

And tho' Fortune may seem to have turned from the dwelling
  Of him thou regardest her favoring ray,
Thou wilt find there a gift, all her treasures excelling,
  Which, proudly he feels, hath ennobled his way.

'Tis that freedom of mind, which no vulgar dominion
  Can turn from the path a pure conscience approves;
Which, with hope in the heart, and no chain on the pinion,
  Holds upwards its course to the light which it loves.

'Tis this makes the pride of his humble retreat,
  And, with this, tho' of all other treasures bereaved,
The breeze of his garden to him is more sweet
  Than the costliest incense that Pomp e'er received.

Then, come,--if a board so untempting hath power
  To win thee from grandeur, its best shall be thine;
And there's one, long the light of the bard's happy bower,
  Who, smiling, will blend her bright welcome with mine.






SING, SWEET HARP.


Sing, sweet Harp, oh sing to me
  Some song of ancient days,
Whose sounds, in this sad memory,
  Long buried dreams shall raise;--
Some lay that tells of vanished fame,
  Whose light once round us shone;
Of noble pride, now turned to shame,
  And hopes for ever gone.--
Sing, sad Harp, thus sing to me;
  Alike our doom is cast,
Both lost to all but memory,
  We live but in the past.

How mournfully the midnight air
  Among thy chords doth sigh,
As if it sought some echo there
  Of voices long gone by;--
Of Chieftains, now forgot, who seemed
  The foremost then in fame;
Of Bards who, once immortal deemed,
  Now sleep without a name.--
In vain, sad Harp, the midnight air
  Among thy chords doth sigh;
In vain it seeks an echo there
  Of voices long gone by.

Couldst thou but call those spirits round.
  Who once, in bower and hall,
Sat listening to thy magic sound,
  Now mute and mouldering all;--
But, no; they would but wake to weep
  Their children's slavery;
Then leave them in their dreamless sleep,
  The dead, at least, are free!--
Hush, hush, sad Harp, that dreary tone,
  That knell of Freedom's day;
Or, listening to its death-like moan,
  Let me, too, die away.






SONG OF THE BATTLE EVE.

TIME--THE NINTH CENTURY.


To-morrow, comrade, we
On the battle-plain must be,
  There to conquer, or both lie low!
The morning star is up,--
But there's wine still in the cup,
  And we'll take another quaff, ere we go, boy, go;
  We'll take another quaff, ere we go.

'Tis true, in manliest eyes
A passing tear will rise,
  When we think of the friends we leave lone;
But what can wailing do?
See, our goblet's weeping too!
  With its tears we'll chase away our own, boy, our own;
  With its tears we'll chase away our own.

But daylight's stealing on;--
The last that o'er us shone
  Saw our children around us play;
The next--ah! where shall we
And those rosy urchins be?
  But--no matter--grasp thy sword and away, boy, away;
  No matter--grasp thy sword and away!

Let those, who brook the chain
Of Saxon or of Dane,
  Ignobly by their firesides stay;
One sigh to home be given,
One heartfelt prayer to heaven,
  Then, for Erin and her cause, boy, hurra! hurra! hurra!
  Then, for Erin and her cause, hurra!






THE WANDERING BARD.


What life like that of the bard can be--
The wandering bard, who roams as free
As the mountain lark that o'er him sings,
And, like that lark, a music brings
Within him, where'er he comes or goes,--
A fount that for ever flows!
The world's to him like some playground,
Where fairies dance their moonlight round;--
If dimmed the turf where late they trod,
The elves but seek some greener sod;
So, when less bright his scene of glee,
To another away flies he!

Oh, what would have been young Beauty's doom,
Without a bard to fix her bloom?
They tell us, in the moon's bright round,
Things lost in this dark world are found;
So charms, on earth long past and gone,
In the poet's lay live on.--
Would ye have smiles that ne'er grow dim?
You've only to give them all to him.
Who, with but a touch of Fancy's wand,
Can lend them life, this life beyond,
And fix them high, in Poesy's sky,--
Young stars that never die!

Then, welcome the bard where'er he comes,--
For, tho' he hath countless airy homes,
To which his wing excursive roves,
Yet still, from time to time, he loves
To light upon earth and find such cheer
As brightens our banquet here.
No matter how far, how fleet he flies,
You've only to light up kind young eyes,
Such signal-fires as here are given,--
And down he'll drop from Fancy's heaven,
The minute such call to love or mirth
Proclaims he's wanting on earth!






ALONE IN CROWDS TO WANDER ON.


Alone in crowds to wander on,
And feel that all the charm is gone
Which voices dear and eyes beloved
Shed round us once, where'er we roved--
This, this the doom must be
Of all who've loved, and lived to see
The few bright things they thought would stay
For ever near them, die away.

Tho' fairer forms around us throng,
Their smiles to others all belong,
And want that charm which dwells alone
Round those the fond heart calls its own.
Where, where the sunny brow?
The long-known voice--where are they now?
Thus ask I still, nor ask in vain,
The silence answers all too plain.

Oh, what is Fancy's magic worth,
If all her art can not call forth
One bliss like those we felt of old
From lips now mute, and eyes now cold?
No, no,--her spell is vain,--
As soon could she bring back again
Those eyes themselves from out the grave,
As wake again one bliss they gave.






I'VE A SECRET TO TELL THEE.


I've a secret to tell thee, but hush! not here,--
  Oh! not where the world its vigil keeps:
I'll seek, to whisper it in thine ear,
  Some shore where the Spirit of Silence sleeps;
Where summer's wave unmurmuring dies,
  Nor fay can hear the fountain's gush;
Where, if but a note her night-bird sighs,
  The rose saith, chidingly, "Hush, sweet, hush!"

There, amid the deep silence of that hour,
  When stars can be heard in ocean dip,
Thyself shall, under some rosy bower,
  Sit mute, with thy finger on thy lip:
Like him, the boy,[1] who born among
  The flowers that on the Nile-stream blush,
Sits ever thus,--his only song
  To earth and heaven, "Hush, all, hush!"


[1] The God of Silence, thus pictured by the Egyptians.






SONG OF INNISFAIL.


They came from a land beyond the sea,
  And now o'er the western main
Set sail, in their good ships, gallantly,
  From the sunny land of Spain.
"Oh, where's the Isle we've seen in dreams,
  Our destined home or grave?"[1]
Thus sung they as, by the morning's beams,
  They swept the Atlantic wave.

And, lo, where afar o'er ocean shines
  A sparkle of radiant green,
As tho' in that deep lay emerald mines,
  Whose light thro' the wave was seen.
"'Tis Innisfail[2]--'tis Innisfail!"
  Rings o'er the echoing sea;
While, bending to heaven, the warriors hail
  That home of the brave and free.

Then turned they unto the Eastern wave,
  Where now their Day-God's eye
A look of such sunny-omen gave
  As lighted up sea and sky.
Nor frown was seen thro' sky or sea,
  Nor tear o'er leaf or sod,
When first on their Isle of Destiny
  Our great forefathers trod.


[1] Milesius remembered the remarkable prediction of the principal Druid,
who foretold that the posterity of Gadelus should obtain the possession of
a Western Island (which was Ireland), and there inhabit.--_Keating_.

[2] The Island of Destiny, one of the ancient names of Ireland.






THE NIGHT DANCE.


Strike the gay harp! see the moon is on high,
  And, as true to her beam as the tides of the ocean,
Young hearts, when they feel the soft light of her eye,
  Obey the mute call and heave into motion.
Then, sound notes--the gayest, the lightest,
  That ever took wing, when heaven looked brightest!
      Again! Again!

Oh! could such heart-stirring music be heard
  In that City of Statues described by romancers,
So wakening its spell, even stone would be stirred,
  And statues themselves all start into dancers!

Why then delay, with such sounds in our ears,
  And the flower of Beauty's own garden before us,--
While stars overhead leave the song of their spheres,
  And listening to ours, hang wondering o'er us?
Again, that strain!--to hear it thus sounding
  Might set even Death's cold pulses bounding--
      Again! Again!

Oh, what delight when the youthful and gay,
  Each with eye like a sunbeam and foot like a feather,
Thus dance, like the Hours to the music of May,
  And mingle sweet song and sunshine together!






THERE ARE SOUNDS OF MIRTH.


There are sounds of mirth in the night-air ringing,
  And lamps from every casement shown;
While voices blithe within are singing,
  That seem to say "Come," in every tone.
Ah! once how light, in Life's young season,
  My heart had leapt at that sweet lay;
Nor paused to ask of graybeard Reason
  Should I the syren call obey.

And, see--the lamps still livelier glitter,
  The syren lips more fondly sound;
No, seek, ye nymphs, some victim fitter
  To sink in your rosy bondage bound.
Shall a bard, whom not the world in arms
  Could bend to tyranny's rude control,
Thus quail at sight of woman's charms
  And yield to a smile his freeborn soul?

Thus sung the sage, while, slyly stealing,
  The nymphs their fetters around him cast,
And,--their laughing eyes, the while, concealing,--
  Led Freedom's Bard their slave at last.
For the Poet's heart, still prone to loving,
Was like that rack of the Druid race,[1]
Which the gentlest touch at once set moving,
  But all earth's power couldn't cast from its base.


[1] The Rocking Stones of the Druids, some of which no force is able to
dislodge from their stations.






OH, ARRANMORE, LOVED ARRANMORE.


Oh! Arranmore, loved Arranmore,
  How oft I dream of thee,
And of those days when, by thy shore,
  I wandered young and free.
Full many a path I've tried, since then,
  Thro' pleasure's flowery maze,
But ne'er could find the bliss again
  I felt in those sweet days.

How blithe upon thy breezy cliffs,
  At sunny morn I've stood,
With heart as bounding as the skiffs
  That danced along thy flood;
Or, when the western wave grew bright
  With daylight's parting wing,
Have sought that Eden in its light,
  Which dreaming poets sing;[1]--

That Eden where the immortal brave
  Dwell in a land serene,--
Whose bowers beyond the shining wave,
  At sunset, oft are seen.
Ah dream too full of saddening truth!
  Those mansions o'er the main
Are like the hopes I built in youth,--
  As sunny and as vain!


[1] "The inhabitants of Arranmore are still persuaded that, in a clear
day, they can see from this coast Hy Brysail or the Enchanted Island, the
paradise of the Pagan Irish, and concerning which they relate a number of
romantic stories",--_Beaufort's "Ancient Topography of Ireland_."






LAY HIS SWORD BY HIS SIDE.


Lay his sword by his side,[1]--it hath served him too well
  Not to rest near his pillow below;
To the last moment true, from his hand ere it fell,
  Its point was still turned to a flying foe.
Fellow-laborers in life, let them slumber in death,
  Side by side, as becomes the reposing brave,--
That sword which he loved still unbroke in its sheath,
  And himself unsubdued in his grave.

Yet pause--for, in fancy, a still voice I hear,
  As if breathed from his brave heart's remains;--
Faint echo of that which, in Slavery's ear,
  Once sounded the war-word, "Burst your chains!"
And it cries from the grave where the hero lies deep,
  "Tho' the day of your Chieftain for ever hath set,
"Oh leave not his sword thus inglorious to sleep,--
  "It hath victory's life in it yet!"

"Should some alien, unworthy such weapon to wield,
  "Dare to touch thee, my own gallant sword,
"Then rest in thy sheath, like a talisman sealed,
 Or return to the grave of thy chainless lord.
But, if grasped by a hand that hath learned the proud use
 Of a falchion, like thee, on the battle-plain,--
Then, at Liberty's summons, like lightning let loose,
 Leap forth from thy dark sheath again!"


[1] It was the custom of the ancient Irish, in the manner of the
Scythians, to bury the favorite swords of their heroes along with them.






OH, COULD WE DO WITH THIS WORLD OF OURS.


Oh, could we do with this world of ours
As thou dost with thy garden bowers,
Reject the weeds and keep the flowers,
  What a heaven on earth we'd make it!
So bright a dwelling should be our own,
So warranted free from sigh or frown,
That angels soon would be coming down,
  By the week or month to take it.

Like those gay flies that wing thro' air,
And in themselves a lustre bear,
A stock of light, still ready there,
  Whenever they wish to use it;
So, in this world I'd make for thee,
Our hearts should all like fire-flies be,
And the flash of wit or poesy
  Break forth whenever we choose it.

While every joy that glads our sphere
Hath still some shadow hovering near,
In this new world of ours, my dear,
  Such shadows will all be omitted:--
Unless they're like that graceful one,
Which, when thou'rt dancing in the sun.
Still near thee, leaves a charm upon
  Each spot where it hath flitted.






THE WINE-CUP IS CIRCLING.


The wine-cup is circling in Almhin's hall,[1]
  And its Chief, mid his heroes reclining,
Looks up with a sigh, to the trophied wall,
  Where his sword hangs idly shining.
    When, hark! that shout
    From the vale without,--
    "Arm ye quick, the Dane, the Dane is nigh!"
    Every Chief starts up
    From his foaming cup,
  And "To battle, to battle!" is the Finian's cry.

The minstrels have seized their harps of gold,
  And they sing such thrilling numbers,
'Tis like the voice of the Brave, of old,
  Breaking forth from the place of slumbers!
    Spear to buckler rang,
    As the minstrels sang,
  And the Sun-burst[2] o'er them floated wide;
    While remembering the yoke
    Which their father's broke,
  "On for liberty, for liberty!" the Finians cried.

Like clouds of the night the Northmen came,
  O'er the valley of Almhin lowering;
While onward moved, in the light of its fame,
  That banner of Erin, towering.
    With the mingling shock
    Rung cliff and rock,
  While, rank on rank, the invaders die:
    And the shout, that last,
    O'er the dying past,
  Was "victory! victory!"--the Finian's cry.


[1] The Palace of Fin Mac-Cumhal (the Fingal of Macpherson) in Leinster.
It was built on the top of the hill, which has retained from thence the
name of the Hill of Allen, in the county of Kildare. The Finians, or
Fenii, were the celebrated National Militia of Ireland, which this chief
commanded. The introduction of the Danes in the above song is an
anachronism common to most of the Finian and Ossianic legends.

[2] The name given to the banner of the Irish.






THE DREAM OF THOSE DAYS.


The dream of those days when first I sung thee is o'er,
Thy triumph hath stained the charm thy sorrows then wore;
And even of the light which Hope once shed o'er thy chains,
Alas, not a gleam to grace thy freedom remains.

Say, is it that slavery sunk so deep in thy heart,
That still the dark brand is there, though chainless thou art;
And Freedom's sweet fruit, for which thy spirit long burned,
Now, reaching at last thy lip, to ashes hath turned?

Up Liberty's steep by Truth and Eloquence led,
With eyes on her temple fixt, how proud was thy tread!
Ah, better thou ne'er hadst lived that summit to gain
Or died in the porch than thus dishonor the fane.






FROM THIS HOUR THE PLEDGE IS GIVEN.


From this hour the pledge is given,
  From this hour my soul is thine:
Come what will, from earth or heaven,
  Weal or woe, thy fate be mine.
When the proud and great stood by thee,
  None dared thy rights to spurn;
And if now they're false and fly thee,
  Shall I, too, basely turn?
No;--whate'er the fires that try thee,
  In the same this heart shall burn.

Tho' the sea, where thou embarkest,
  Offers now no friendly shore,
Light may come where all looks darkest,
  Hope hath life when life seems o'er.
And, of those past ages dreaming,
  When glory decked thy brow,
Oft I fondly think, tho' seeming
  So fallen and clouded now,
Thou'lt again break forth, all beaming,--
  None so bright, so blest as thou!






SILENCE IS IN OUR FESTAL HALLS.[1]


Silence is in our festal halls,--
  Sweet Son of Song! thy course is o'er;
In vain on thee sad Erin calls,
  Her minstrel's voice responds no more;--
All silent as the Eolian shell
  Sleeps at the close of some bright day,
When the sweet breeze that waked its swell
  At sunny morn hath died away.

Yet at our feasts thy spirit long
  Awakened by music's spell shall rise;
For, name so linked with deathless song
  Partakes its charm and never dies:
And even within the holy fane
  When music wafts the soul to heaven,
One thought to him whose earliest strain
  Was echoed there shall long be given.

But, where is now the cheerful day.
  The social night when by thy side
He who now weaves this parting lay
  His skilless voice with thine allied;
And sung those songs whose every tone,
  When bard and minstrel long have past,
Shall still in sweetness all their own
  Embalmed by fame, undying last.

Yes, Erin, thine alone the fame,--
  Or, if thy bard have shared the crown,
From thee the borrowed glory came,
  And at thy feet is now laid down.
Enough, if Freedom still inspire
  His latest song and still there be.
As evening closes round his lyre,
  One ray upon its chords from thee.


[1] It is hardly necessary, perhaps, to inform the reader, that these
lines are meant as a tribute of sincere friendship to the memory of an old
and valued colleague in this work, Sir John Stevenson.








NATIONAL AIRS




ADVERTISEMENT.


It is Cicero, I believe, who says "_natur, ad modes ducimur;_" and the
abundance of wild, indigenous airs, which almost every country, except
England, possesses, sufficiently proves the truth of his assertion. The
lovers of this simple, but interesting kind of music, are here presented
with the first number of a collection, which, I trust, their contributions
will enable us to continue. A pretty air without words resembles one of
those _half_ creatures of Plato, which are described as wandering in
search of the remainder of themselves through the world. To supply this
other half, by uniting with congenial words the many fugitive melodies
which have hitherto had none,--or only such as are unintelligible to the
generality of their hearers,--it is the object and ambition of the present
work. Neither is it our intention to confine ourselves to what are
strictly called National Melodies, but, wherever we meet with any
wandering and beautiful air, to which poetry has not yet assigned a worthy
home, we shall venture to claim it as an _estray_ swan, and enrich our
humble Hippocrene with its song.


T.M.






NATIONAL AIRS






A TEMPLE TO FRIENDSHIP.

(SPANISH AIR.)


"A Temple to Friendship;" said Laura, enchanted,
  "I'll build in this garden,--the thought is divine!"
Her temple was built and she now only wanted
  An image of Friendship to place on the shrine.
She flew to a sculptor, who set down before her
  A Friendship, the fairest his art could invent;
But so cold and so dull, that the youthful adorer
  Saw plainly this was not the idol she meant.

"Oh! never," she cried, "could I think of enshrining
  "An image whose looks are so joyless and dim;--
"But yon little god, upon roses reclining,
  "We'll make, if you please, Sir, a Friendship of him."
So the bargain was struck; with the little god laden
  She joyfully flew to her shrine in the grove:
"Farewell," said the sculptor, "you're not the first maiden
  "Who came but for Friendship and took away Love."






FLOW ON, THOU SHINING RIVER.

(PORTUGUESE AIR.)


Flow on, thou shining river;
  But ere thou reach the sea
Seek Ella's bower and give her
  The wreaths I fling o'er thee
And tell her thus, if she'll be mine
  The current of our lives shall be,
With joys along their course to shine,
  Like those sweet flowers on thee.

But if in wandering thither
  Thou find'st she mocks my prayer,
Then leave those wreaths to wither
  Upon the cold bank there;
And tell her thus, when youth is o'er,
  Her lone and loveless Charms shall be
Thrown by upon life's weedy shore.
  Like those sweet flowers from thee.






ALL THAT'S BRIGHT MUST FADE.

(INDIAN AIR.)


All that's bright must fade,--
  The brightest still the fleetest;
All that's sweet was made
  But to be lost when sweetest.
Stars that shine and fall;--
  The flower that drops in springing;--
These, alas! are types of all
  To which our hearts are clinging.
All that's bright must fade,--
  The brightest still the fleetest;
All that's sweet was made
  But to be lost when sweetest?

Who would seek our prize
  Delights that end in aching?
Who would trust to ties
  That every hour are breaking?
Better far to be
  In utter darkness lying,
Than to be blest with light and see
  That light for ever flying.
All that's bright must fade,--
  The brightest still the fleetest;
All that's sweet was made
  But to be lost when sweetest!






SO WARMLY WE MET.

(HUNGARIAN AIR.)


So warmly we met and so fondly we parted,
  That which was the sweeter even I could not tell,--
That first look of welcome her sunny eyes darted,
  Or that tear of passion, which blest our farewell.
To meet was a heaven and to part thus another,--
  Our joy and our sorrow seemed rivals in bliss;
Oh! Cupid's two eyes are not liker each other
  In smiles and in tears than that moment to this.

The first was like day-break, new, sudden, delicious,--
  The dawn of a pleasure scarce kindled up yet;
The last like the farewell of daylight, more precious,
  More glowing and deep, as 'tis nearer its set.
Our meeting, tho' happy, was tinged by a sorrow
  To think that such happiness could not remain;
While our parting, tho' sad, gave a hope that to-morrow
  Would bring back the blest hour of meeting again.






THOSE EVENING BELLS.

(AIR.--THE BELLS OF ST. PETERSBURGH.)


Those evening bells! those evening bells!
How many a tale their music tells,
Of youth and home and that sweet time
When last I heard their soothing chime.

Those joyous hours are past away:
And many a heart, that then was gay.
Within the tomb now darkly dwells,
And hears no more those evening bells.

And so 'twill be when I am gone:
That tuneful peal will still ring on,
While other bards shall walk these dells,
And sing your praise, sweet evening bells!






SHOULD THOSE FOND HOPES.

(PORTUGUESE AIR.)


Should those fond hopes e'er forsake thee,
  Which now so sweetly thy heart employ:
Should the cold world come to wake thee
  From all thy visions of youth and joy;
Should the gay friends, for whom thou wouldst banish
  Him who once thought thy young heart his own,
All, like spring birds, falsely vanish,
  And leave thy winter unheeded and lone;--

Oh! 'tis then that he thou hast slighted
  Would come to cheer thee, when all seem'd o'er;
Then the truant, lost and blighted,
  Would to his bosom be taken once more.
Like that dear bird we both can remember,
  Who left us while summer shone round,
But, when chilled by bleak December,
  On our threshold a welcome still found.






REASON, FOLLY, AND BEAUTY.

(ITALIAN AIR.)


Reason and Folly and Beauty, they say,
Went on a party of pleasure one day:
  Folly played
  Around the maid,
The bells of his cap rung merrily out;
  While Reason took
  To his sermon-book--
Oh! which was the pleasanter no one need doubt,
Which was the pleasanter no one need doubt.

Beauty, who likes to be thought very sage.
Turned for a moment to Reason's dull page,
  Till Folly said,
  "Look here, sweet maid!"--
The sight of his cap brought her back to herself;
  While Reason read
  His leaves of lead,
With no one to mind him, poor sensible elf!
No,--no one to mind him, poor sensible elf!

Then Reason grew jealous of Folly's gay cap;
Had he that on, he her heart might entrap--
  "There it is,"
  Quoth Folly, "old quiz!"
(Folly was always good-natured, 'tis said,)
  "Under the sun
  There's no such fun,
As Reason with my cap and bells on his head!"
"Reason with my cap and bells on his head!"

But Reason the head-dress so awkwardly wore,
That Beauty now liked him still less than before;
  While Folly took
  Old Reason's book,
And twisted the leaves in a cap of such _ton_,
  That Beauty vowed
  (Tho' not aloud),
She liked him still better in that than his own,
Yes,--liked him still better in that than his own.






FARE THEE WELL, THOU LOVELY ONE!

(SICILIAN AIR.)


Fare thee well, thou lovely one!
  Lovely still, but dear no more;
Once his soul of truth is gone,
  Love's sweet life is o'er.
Thy words, what e'er their flattering spell,
  Could scarce have thus deceived;
But eyes that acted truth so well
  Were sure to be believed.
Then, fare thee well, thou lovely one!
  Lovely still, but dear no more;
Once his soul of truth is gone,
  Love's sweet life is o'er.

Yet those eyes look constant still,
  True as stars they keep their light;
Still those cheeks their pledge fulfil
  Of blushing always bright.
'Tis only on thy changeful heart
  The blame of falsehood lies;
Love lives in every other part,
  But there, alas! he dies.
Then, fare thee well, thou lovely one!
  Lovely still, but dear no more;
Once his soul of truth is gone,
  Love's sweet life is o'er.






DOST THOU REMEMBER.

(PORTUGUESE AIR.)


Dost thou remember that place so lonely,
A place for lovers and lovers only,
 Where first I told thee all my secret sighs?
When, as the moonbeam that trembled o'er thee
Illumed thy blushes, I knelt before thee,
  And read my hope's sweet triumph in those eyes?
Then, then, while closely heart was drawn to heart,
Love bound us--never, never more to part!

And when I called thee by names the dearest[1]
That love could fancy, the fondest, nearest,--
  "My life, my only life!" among the rest;
In those sweet accents that still enthral me,
Thou saidst, "Ah!" wherefore thy life thus call me?
  "Thy soul, thy soul's the name I love best;
"For life soon passes,--but how blest to be
"That Soul which never, never parts from thee!"


[1] The thought in this verse is borrowed from the original Portuguese
words.






OH, COME TO ME WHEN DAYLIGHT SETS.

(VENETIAN AIR.)


Oh, come to me when daylight sets;
  Sweet! then come to me,
When smoothly go our gondolets
  O'er the moonlight sea.
When Mirth's awake, and Love begins,
  Beneath that glancing ray,
With sound of lutes and mandolins,
  To steal young hearts away.
Then, come to me when daylight sets;
  Sweet! then come to me,
When smoothly go our gondolets
  O'er the moonlight sea.

Oh, then's the hour for those who love,
  Sweet, like thee and me;
When all's so calm below, above,
  In Heaven and o'er the sea.
When maiden's sing sweet barcarolles,
  And Echo sings again
So sweet, that all with ears and souls
  Should love and listen then.
So, come to me when daylight sets;
  Sweet! then come to me,
When smoothly go our gondolets
  O'er the moonlight sea.






OFT, IN THE STILLY NIGHT.

(SCOTCH AIR.)


Oft in the stilly night,
  Ere Slumber's chain has bound me,
Fond Memory brings the light
  Of other days around me;
    The smiles, the tears,
    Of boyhood's years,
  The words of love then spoken;
    The eyes that shone,
    Now dimmed and gone,
  The cheerful hearts now broken!
Thus, in the stilly night,
  Ere Slumber's chain has bound me,
Sad Memory brings the light
  Of other days around me.

When I remember all
  The friends, so linked together,
I've seen around me fall,
  Like leaves in wintry weather;
    I feel like one,
    Who treads alone,
  Some banquet-hall deserted,
    Whose lights are fled,
    Whose garlands dead,
  And all but he departed!
Thus, in the stilly night,
  Ere Slumber's chain has bound me,
Sad Memory brings the light
  Of other days around me.






HARK! THE VESPER HYMN IS STEALING.

(RUSSIAN AIR.)


Hark! the vesper hymn is stealing
  O'er the waters soft and clear;
Nearer yet and nearer pealing,
  And now bursts upon the ear:
    Jubilate, Amen.
Farther now, now farther stealing
  Soft it fades upon the ear:
    Jubilate, Amen.

Now, like moonlight waves retreating
  To the shore it dies along;
Now, like angry surges meeting,
  Breaks the mingled tide of song
    Jubilate, Amen.
Hush! again, like waves, retreating
  To the shore, it dies along:
     Jubilate, Amen.






LOVE AND HOPE.

(SWISS AIR.)


At morn, beside yon summer sea,
  Young Hope and Love reclined;
But scarce had noon-tide come, when he
Into his bark leapt smilingly,
  And left poor Hope behind.

"I go," said Love, "to sail awhile
  "Across this sunny main;"
And then so sweet, his parting smile,
That Hope, who never dreamt of guile,
  Believed he'd come again.

She lingered there till evening's beam
  Along the waters lay;
And o'er the sands, in thoughtful dream,
Oft traced his name, which still the stream
  As often washed away.

At length a sail appears in sight,
  And toward the maiden moves!
'Tis Wealth that comes, and gay and bright,
His golden bark reflects the light,
  But ah! it is not Love's.

Another sail--'twas Friendship showed
  Her night-lamp o'er the sea;
And calm the light that lamp bestowed;
But Love had lights that warmer glowed,
  And where, alas! was he?

Now fast around the sea and shore
  Night threw her darkling chain;
The sunny sails were seen no more,
Hope's morning dreams of bliss were o'er--
  Love never came again!






THERE COMES A TIME.

(GERMAN AIR.)


There comes a time, a dreary time,
  To him whose heart hath flown
O'er all the fields of youth's sweet prime,
  And made each flow its own.
'Tis when his soul must first renounce
  Those dreams so bright, so fond;
Oh! then's the time to die at once.
  For life has naught beyond.

When sets the sun on Afric's shore,
  That instant all is night;
And so should life at once be o'er.
  When Love withdraws his light;--
Nor, like our northern day, gleam on
  Thro' twilight's dim delay,
The cold remains of lustre gone,
  Of fire long past away.






MY HARP HAS ONE UNCHANGING THEME.

(SWEDISH AIR.)


My harp has one unchanging theme,
  One strain that still comes o'er
Its languid chord, as 'twere a dream
  Of joy that's now no more.
In vain I try, with livelier air,
  To wake the breathing string;
That voice of other times is there,
  And saddens all I sing.

Breathe on, breathe on, thou languid strain,
  Henceforth be all my own;
Tho' thou art oft so full of pain
  Few hearts can bear thy tone.
Yet oft thou'rt sweet, as if the sigh,
  The breath that Pleasure's wings
Gave out, when last they wantoned by.
  Were still upon thy strings.






OH, NO--NOT EVEN WHEN FIRST WE LOVED.

(CASHMERIAN AIR.)


Oh, no--not even when first we loved,
  Wert thou as dear as now thou art;
Thy beauty then my senses moved,
  But now thy virtues bind my heart.
What was but Passion's sigh before,
  Has since been turned to Reason's vow;
And, though I then might love thee _more_,
  Trust me, I love thee _better_ now.

Altho' my heart in earlier youth
  Might kindle with more wild desire,
Believe me, it has gained in truth
  Much more than it has lost in fire.
The flame now warms my inmost core,
  That then but sparkled o'er my brow,
And, though I seemed to love thee more,
  Yet, oh, I love thee better now.






PEACE BE AROUND THEE.

(SCOTCH AIR.)


Peace be around thee, wherever thou rov'st;
  May life be for thee one summer's day,
And all that thou wishest and all that thou lov'st
  Come smiling around thy sunny way!
If sorrow e'er this calm should break,
  May even thy tears pass off so lightly,
Like spring-showers, they'll only make
  The smiles, that follow shine more brightly.

May Time who sheds his blight o'er all
  And daily dooms some joy to death
O'er thee let years so gently fall,
  They shall not crush one flower beneath.
As half in shade and half in sun
  This world along its path advances.
May that side the sun's upon
  Be all that e'er shall meet thy glances!






COMMON SENSE AND GENIUS.

(FRENCH AIR.)


While I touch the string,
  Wreathe my brows with laurel,
For the tale I sing
  Has, for once, a moral.
Common Sense, one night,
  Tho' not used to gambols,
Went out by moonlight,
  With Genius, on his rambles.
    While I touch the string, etc.

Common Sense went on,
  Many wise things saying;
While the light that shone
  Soon set Genius straying.
_One_ his eye ne'er raised
  From the path before him;
T'_other_ idly gazed
  On each night-cloud o'er him.
    While I touch the string, etc.

So they came, at last,
  To a shady river;
Common Sense soon past,
  Safe, as he doth ever;
While the boy, whose look
  Was in Heaven that minute.
Never saw the brook,
  But tumbled headlong in it!
    While I touch the string, etc.

How the Wise One smiled,
  When safe o'er the torrent,
At that youth, so wild,
  Dripping from the current!
Sense went home to bed;
  Genius, left to shiver
On the bank, 'tis said,
  Died of that cold river!
    While I touch the string, etc.






THEN, FARE THEE WELL.

(OLD ENGLISH AIR.)


Then, fare thee well, my own dear love,
  This world has now for us
No greater grief, no pain above
  The pain of parting thus,
      Dear love!
  The pain of parting thus.

Had we but known, since first we met,
  Some few short hours of bliss,
We might, in numbering them, forget
  The deep, deep pain of this,
      Dear love!
  The deep, deep pain of this.

But no, alas, we've never seen
  One glimpse of pleasure's ray,
But still there came some cloud between,
  And chased it all away,
      Dear love!
  And chased it all away.

Yet, even could those sad moments last,
  Far dearer to my heart
Were hours of grief, together past,
  Than years of mirth apart,
      Dear love!
  Than years of mirth apart.

Farewell! our hope was born in fears,
  And nurst mid vain regrets:
Like winter suns, it rose in tears,
  Like them in tears it sets,
      Dear love!
  Like them in tears it sets.






GAYLY SOUNDS THE CASTANET.

(MALTESE AIR.)


Gayly sounds the castanet,
  Beating time to bounding feet,
When, after daylight's golden set,
  Maids and youths by moonlight meet.
Oh, then, how sweet to move
 Thro' all that maze of mirth,
Led by light from eyes we love
  Beyond all eyes on earth.

Then, the joyous banquet spread
  On the cool and fragrant ground,
With heaven's bright sparklers overhead,
  And still brighter sparkling round.
Oh, then, how sweet to say
  Into some loved one's ear,
Thoughts reserved thro' many a day
  To be thus whispered here.

When the dance and feast are done,
  Arm in arm as home we stray,
How sweet to see the dawning sun
  O'er her cheek's warm blushes play!
Then, too, the farewell kiss--
  The words, whose parting tone
Lingers still in dreams of bliss,
  That haunt young hearts alone.






LOVE IS A HUNTER-BOY.

(LANGUEDOCIAN AIR.)


Love is a hunter-boy,
  Who, makes young hearts his prey,
And in his nets of joy
  Ensnares them night and day.
In vain concealed they lie--
  Love tracks them every where;
In vain aloft they fly--
  Love shoots them flying there.

But 'tis his joy most sweet,
  At early dawn to trace
The print of Beauty's feet,
  And give the trembler chase.
And if, thro' virgin snow,
  He tracks her footsteps fair,
How sweet for Love to know
  None went before him there.






COME, CHASE THAT STARTING TEAR AWAY.

(FRENCH AIR.)


Come, chase that starting tear away,
  Ere mine to meet it springs;
To-night, at least, to-night be gay,
  Whate'er to-morrow brings.
Like sunset gleams, that linger late
  When all is darkening fast,
Are hours like these we snatch from Fate--
  The brightest, and the last.
    Then, chase that starting tear, etc.

To gild the deepening gloom, if Heaven
  But one bright hour allow,
Oh, think that one bright hour is given,
  In all its splendor, now.
Let's live it out--then sink in night,
  Like waves that from the shore
One minute swell, are touched with light,
  Then lost for evermore!
    Come, chase that starting tear, etc.






JOYS OF YOUTH, HOW FLEETING!

(PORTUGUESE AIR.)


Whisperings, heard by wakeful maids,
  To whom the night-stars guide us;
Stolen walks thro' moonlight shades,
  With those we love beside us,
      Hearts beating,
      At meeting;
      Tears starting,
      At parting;
Oh, sweet youth, how soon it fades!
  Sweet joys of youth, how fleeting!

Wanderings far away from home,
  With life all new before us;
Greetings warm, when home we come,
  From hearts whose prayers watched o'er us.
      Tears starting,
      At parting;
      Hearts beating,
      At meeting;
Oh, sweet youth, how lost on some!
  To some, how bright and fleeting!






HEAR ME BUT ONCE.

(FRENCH AIR.)


Hear me but once, while o'er the grave,
  In which our Love lies cold and dead,
I count each flattering hope he gave
  Of joys now lost and charms now fled.

Who could have thought the smile he wore
  When first we met would fade away?
Or that a chill would e'er come o'er
  Those eyes so bright thro' many a day?
      Hear me but once, etc.






WHEN LOVE WAS A CHILD

(SWEDISH AIR.)


When Love was a child, and went idling round,
  'Mong flowers the whole summer's day,
One morn in the valley a bower he found,
  So sweet, it allured him to stay.

O'erhead, from the trees, hung a garland fair,
  A fountain ran darkly beneath;--
'Twas Pleasure had hung up the flowerets there;
  Love knew it, and jumped at the wreath.

But Love didn't know--and, at _his_ weak years,
  What urchin was likely to know?--
That Sorrow had made of her own salt tears
  The fountain that murmured below.

He caught at the wreath--but with too much haste,
  As boys when impatient will do--
It fell in those waters of briny taste,
  And the flowers were all wet through.

This garland he now wears night and day;
  And, tho' it all sunny appears
With Pleasure's own light, each leaf, they say,
  Still tastes of the Fountain of Tears.






SAY, WHAT SHALL BE OUR SPORT TO-DAY?

(SICILIAN AIR.)


Say, what shall be our sport today?
  There's nothing on earth, in sea, or air,
Too bright, too high, too wild, too gay
  For spirits like mine to dare!
'Tis like the returning bloom
  Of those days, alas, gone by,
When I loved, each hour--I scarce knew whom--
  And was blest--I scarce knew why.

Ay--those were days when life had wings,
  And flew, oh, flew so wild a height
That, like the lark which sunward springs,
  'Twas giddy with too much light.
And, tho' of some plumes bereft,
  With that sun, too, nearly set,
I've enough of light and wing still left
  For a few gay soarings yet.






BRIGHT BE THY DREAMS.

(WELSH AIR.)


Bright be thy dreams--may all thy weeping
Turn into smiles while thou art sleeping.
  May those by death or seas removed,
The friends, who in thy springtime knew thee,
  All thou hast ever prized or loved,
In dreams come smiling to thee!

There may the child, whose love lay deepest,
Dearest of all, come while thou sleepest;
  Still as she was--no charm forgot--
No lustre lost that life had given;
  Or, if changed, but changed to what
Thou'lt find her yet in Heaven!






GO, THEN--'TIS VAIN.

(SICILIAN AIR.)


Go, then--'tis vain to hover
  Thus round a hope that's dead;
At length my dream is over;
  'Twas sweet--'twas false--'tis fled!
Farewell! since naught it moves thee,
  Such truth as mine to see--
Some one, who far less loves thee,
  Perhaps more blest will be.

Farewell, sweet eyes, whose brightness
  New life around me shed;
Farewell, false heart, whose lightness
  Now leaves me death instead.
Go, now, those charms surrender
  To some new lover's sigh--
One who, tho' far less tender,
  May be more blest than I.






THE CRYSTAL-HUNTERS.

(SWISS AIR.)


    O'er mountains bright
    With snow and light,
  We Crystal-Hunters speed along;
    While rocks and caves,
    And icy wares,
  Each instant echo to our song;
And, when we meet with store of gems,
We grudge not kings their diadems.
    O'er mountains bright
    With snow and light,
We Crystal-Hunters speed along;
    While grots and caves,
    And icy waves,
Each instant echo to our song.

Not half so oft the lover dreams
  Of sparkles from his lady's eyes,
As we of those refreshing gleams
  That tell where deep the crystal lies;
Tho', next to crystal, we too grant,
That ladies' eyes may most enchant.
    O'er mountains bright, etc.

Sometimes, when on the Alpine rose
  The golden sunset leaves its ray,
So like a gem the floweret glows,
  We hither bend our headlong way;
And, tho' we find no treasure there,
We bless the rose that shines so fair.
  O'er mountains bright
  With snow and light,
We Crystal-Hunters speed along;
  While rocks and caves,
  And icy waves,
Each instant echo to our song,






ROW GENTLY HERE.

(VENETIAN AIR.)


    Row gently here,
    My gondolier,
  So softly wake the tide,
    That not an ear.
    On earth, may hear,
  But hers to whom we glide.
Had Heaven but tongues to speak, as well
   As starry eyes to see,
Oh, think what tales 'twould have to tell
   Of wandering youths like me!

    Now rest thee here.
    My gondolier;
  Hush, hush, for up I go,
    To climb yon light
    Balcony's height,
  While thou keep'st watch below.
Ah! did we take for Heaven above
   But half such pains as we
Take, day and night, for woman's love,
   What' Angels we should be.






OH, DAYS OF YOUTH.

(FRENCH AIR.)


Oh, days of youth and joy, long clouded,
  Why thus for ever haunt my view?
When in the grave your light lay shrouded,
  Why did not Memory die there too?
Vainly doth hope her strain now sing me,
  Telling of joys that yet remain--
No, never more can this life bring me
  One joy that equals youth's sweet pain.

Dim lies the way to death before me,
  Cold winds of Time blow round my brow;
Sunshine of youth! that once fell o'er me,
  Where is your warmth, your glory now?
_'Tis_ not that then no pain could sting me;
  'Tis not that now no joys remain;
Oh, 'tis that life no more can bring me
  One joy so sweet as that worst pain.






WHEN FIRST THAT SMILE.

(VENETIAN AIR.)


When first that smile, like sunshine, blest my sight,
  Oh what a vision then came o'er me!
Long years of love, of calm and pure delight,
  Seemed in that smile to pass before me.
Ne'er did the peasant dream of summer skies,
  Of golden fruit and harvests springing,
With fonder hope than I of those sweet eyes,
  And of the joy their light was bringing.

Where now are all those fondly-promised hours?
  Ah! woman's faith is like her brightness--
Fading as fast as rainbows or day-flowers,
  Or aught that's known for grace and lightness.
Short as the Persian's prayer, at close of day,
  Should be each vow of Love's repeating;
Quick let him worship Beauty's precious ray--
  Even while he kneels, that ray is fleeting!






PEACE TO THE SLUMBERERS!

(CATALONIAN AIR.)


Peace to the slumberers!
  They lie on the battle-plain.
With no shroud to cover them;
  The dew and the summer rain
Are all that weep over them.
      Peace to the slumberers!

Vain was their bravery!--
  The fallen oak lies where it lay,
Across the wintry river;
  But brave hearts, once swept away,
Are gone, alas! forever.
      Vain was their bravery!

Woe to the conqueror!
  Our limbs shall lie as cold as theirs
Of whom his sword bereft us.
  Ere we forget the deep arrears
Of vengeance they have left us!
      Woe to the conqueror!






WHEN THOU SHALT WANDER.

(SICILIAN AIR.)


When thou shalt wander by that sweet light
  We used to gaze on so many an eve,
When love was new and hope was bright,
  Ere I could doubt or thou deceive--
Oh, then, remembering how swift went by
Those hours of transport, even _thou_ may'st sigh.

Yes, proud one! even thy heart may own
  That love like ours was far too sweet
To be, like summer garments thrown
  Aside, when past the summer's heat;
And wish in vain to know again
Such days, such nights, as blest thee then.






WHO'LL BUY MY LOVE-KNOTS?

(PORTUGUESE AIR.)


Hymen, late, his love-knots selling,
Called at many a maiden's dwelling:
None could doubt, who saw or knew them,
Hymen's call was welcome to them.
  "Who'll buy my love-knots?
  "Who'll buy my love-knots?"
Soon as that sweet cry resounded
How his baskets were surrounded!

Maids, who now first dreamt of trying
These gay knots of Hymen's tying;
Dames, who long had sat to watch him
Passing by, but ne'er could catch him;--
  "Who'll buy my love-knots?
  "Who'll buy my love-knots?"--
All at that sweet cry assembled;
Some laughed, some blushed, and some trembled.

"Here are knots," said Hymen, taking
Some loose flowers, "of Love's own making;
"Here are gold ones--you may trust 'em"--
(These, of course, found ready custom).
  "Come, buy my love-knots!
  "Come, buy my love-knots!
"Some are labelled 'Knots to tie men--
"Love the maker--Bought of Hymen.'"

Scarce their bargains were completed,
When the nymphs all cried, "We're cheated!
"See these flowers--they're drooping sadly;
"This gold-knot, too, ties but badly--
  "Who'd buy such love-knots?
  "Who'd buy such love-knots?
"Even this tie, with Love's name round it--
"All a sham--He never bound it."

Love, who saw the whole proceeding,
Would have laughed, but for good breeding;
While Old Hymen, who was used to
Cries like that these dames gave loose to--
  "Take back our love-knots!
  "Take back our love-knots!"
Coolly said, "There's no returning
"Wares on Hymen's hands--Good morning!"






SEE, THE DAWN FROM HEAVEN.

(TO AN AIR SUNG AT ROME, ON CHRISTMAS EVE.)


See, the dawn from Heaven is breaking
  O'er our sight,
And Earth from sin awaking,
  Hails the light!
See those groups of angels, winging
  From the realms above,
On their brows, from Eden, bringing
  Wreaths of Hope and Love.

Hark, their hymns of glory pealing
  Thro' the air,
To mortal ears revealing
  Who lies there!
In that dwelling, dark and lowly,
  Sleeps the Heavenly Son,
He, whose home's above,--the Holy,
  Ever Holy One!






NETS AND CAGES.[1]

(SWEDISH AIR.)


Come, listen to my story, while
  Your needle task you ply:
At what I sing some maids will smile,
  While some, perhaps, may sigh.
Though Love's the theme, and Wisdom blames
  Such florid songs as ours,

Yet Truth sometimes, like eastern dames,
  Can speak her thoughts by flowers.
  Then listen, maids, come listen, while
    Your needle's task you ply;
  At what I sing there's some may smile,
    While some, perhaps, will sigh.

Young Cloe, bent on catching Loves,
  Such nets had learned to frame,
That none, in all our vales and groves,
  E'er caught so much small game:
But gentle Sue, less given to roam,
  While Cloe's nets were taking
Such lots of Loves, sat still at home,
  One little Love-cage making.
    Come, listen, maids, etc.

Much Cloe laughed at Susan's task;
  But mark how things went on:
These light-caught Loves, ere you could ask
  Their name and age, were gone!
So weak poor Cloe's nets were wove,
  That, tho' she charm'd into them
New game each hour, the youngest Love
  Was able to break thro' them.
    Come, listen, maids, etc.

Meanwhile, young Sue, whose cage was wrought
  Of bars too strong to sever,
One Love with golden pinions caught.
  And caged him there for ever;
Instructing, thereby, all coquettes,
  Whate'er their looks or ages,
That, tho 'tis pleasant weaving Nets,
  'Tis wiser to make Cages.

Thus, maidens, thus do I beguile
  The task your fingers ply.--
May all who hear like Susan smile,
  And not, like Cloe, sigh!


[1] Suggested by the following remark of Swift's;--"The reason why so few
marriages are happy, is, because young ladies spend their time in making
nets, not in making cages."






WHEN THROUGH THE PIAZZETTA.

(VENETIAN AIR.)


When thro' the Piazzetta
  Night breathes her cool air,
Then, dearest Ninetta,
  I'll come to thee there.
Beneath thy mask shrouded,
  I'll know thee afar,
As Love knows tho' clouded
  His own Evening Star.

In garb, then, resembling
  Some gay gondolier,
I'll whisper thee, trembling,
  "Our bark, love, is near:
"Now, now, while there hover
  "Those clouds o'er the moon,
"'Twill waft thee safe over
  "Yon silent Lagoon."






GO, NOW, AND DREAM.

(SICILIAN AIR.)


Go, now, and dream o'er that joy in thy slumber--
Moments so sweet again ne'er shalt thou number.
Of Pain's bitter draught the flavor ne'er flies,
While Pleasure's scarce touches the lip ere it dies.
  Go, then, and dream, etc.

That moon, which hung o'er your parting, so splendid,
Often will shine again, bright as she then did--
But, never more will the beam she saw burn
In those happy eyes, at your meeting, return.
  Go, then, and dream, etc.






TAKE HENCE THE BOWL.

(NEAPOLITAN AIR.)


Take hence the bowl;--tho' beaming
  Brightly as bowl e'er shone,
Oh, it but sets me dreaming
  Of happy days now gone.
There, in its clear reflection,
  As in a wizard's glass,
Lost hopes and dead affection,
  Like shades, before me pass.

Each cup I drain brings hither
  Some scene of bliss gone by;--
Bright lips too bright to wither,
  Warm hearts too warm to die.
Till, as the dream comes o'er me
  Of those long vanished years,
Alas, the wine before me
  Seems turning all to tears!






FAREWELL, THERESA!

(VENETIAN AIR.)


Farewell, Theresa! yon cloud that over
  Heaven's pale night-star gathering we see,
Will scarce from that pure orb have past ere thy lover
Swift o'er the wide wave shall wander from thee.

Long, like that dim cloud, I've hung around thee,
  Darkening thy prospects, saddening thy brow;
With gay heart, Theresa, and bright cheek I found thee;
  Oh, think how changed, love, how changed art thou now!

But here I free thee: like one awaking
  From fearful slumber, thou break'st the spell;
'Tis over--the moon, too, her bondage is breaking--
Past are the dark clouds; Theresa, farewell!






HOW OFT, WHEN WATCHING STARS.

(SAVOYARD AIR.)


Oft, when the watching stars grow pale,
  And round me sleeps the moonlight scene,
To hear a flute through yonder vale
  I from my casement lean.
"Come, come, my love!" each note then seems to say,
"Oh, come, my love! the night wears fast away!"
  Never to mortal ear
    Could words, tho' warm they be,
  Speak Passion's language half so clear
    As do those notes to me!

Then quick my own light lute I seek,
  And strike the chords with loudest swell;
And, tho' they naught to others speak,
  _He_ knows their language well.
"I come, my love!" each note then seems to say,
"I come, my love!--thine, thine till break of day."
  Oh, weak the power of words,
    The hues of painting dim
  Compared to what those simple chords
    Then say and paint to him!






WHEN THE FIRST SUMMER BEE.

(GERMAN AIR.)


  When the first summer bee
    O'er the young rose shall hover,
  Then, like that gay rover,
    I'll come to thee.
He to flowers, I to lips, full of sweets to the brim--
What a meeting, what a meeting for me and for him!
  When the first summer bee, etc.

  Then, to every bright tree
    In the garden he'll wander;
    While I, oh, much fonder,
      Will stay with thee.
In search of new sweetness thro' thousands he'll run,
While I find the sweetness of thousands in one.
  Then, to every bright tree, etc.






THO' 'TIS ALL BUT A DREAM.

(FRENCH AIR.)


Tho' 'tis all but a dream at the best,
  And still, when happiest, soonest o'er,
Yet, even in a dream, to be blest
  Is so sweet, that I ask for no more.
    The bosom that opes
    With earliest hopes,
  The soonest finds those hopes untrue:
    As flowers that first
    In spring-time burst
  The earliest wither too!
    Ay--'tis all but a dream, etc.

Tho' by friendship we oft are deceived,
  And find love's sunshine soon o'ercast,
Yet friendship will still be believed.
  And love trusted on to the last.
    The web 'mong the leaves
    The spider weaves
Is like the charm Hope hangs o'er men;
    Tho' often she sees
    'Tis broke by the breeze,
She spins the bright tissue again.
    Ay--'tis all but a dream, etc.






WHEN THE WINE-CUP IS SMILING.

(ITALIAN AIR.)


When the wine-cup is smiling before us,
  And we pledge round to hearts that are true, boy, true,
Then the sky of this life opens o'er us,
  And Heaven gives a glimpse of its blue.
Talk of Adam in Eden reclining,
  We are better, far better off thus, boy, thus;
For _him_ but _two_ bright eyes were shining--
  See, what numbers are sparkling for us!

When on _one_ side the grape-juice is dancing,
  While on t'other a blue eye beams, boy, beams,
'Tis enough, 'twixt the wine and the glancing,
  To disturb even a saint from his dreams.
Yet, tho' life like a river is flowing,
  I care not how fast it goes on, boy, on,
So the grape on its bank is still growing,
  And Love lights the waves as they run.






WHERE SHALL WE BURY OUR SHAME?

(NEAPOLITAN AIR.)


Where shall we bury our shame?
  Where, in what desolate place,
Hide the last wreck of a name
  Broken and stained by disgrace?
Death may dissever the chain,
  Oppression will cease when we're gone;
But the dishonor, the stain,
  Die as we may, will live on.

Was it for this we sent out
  Liberty's cry from our shore?
Was it for this that her shout
  Thrilled to the world's very core?
Thus to live cowards and slaves!--
  Oh, ye free hearts that lie dead,
Do you not, even in your graves,
  Shudder, as o'er you we tread?






NE'ER TALK OF WISDOM'S GLOOMY SCHOOLS.

(MAHRATTA AIR.)


Ne'er talk of Wisdom's gloomy schools;
  Give me the sage who's able
To draw his moral thoughts and rules
  From the study of the table;--
Who learns how lightly, fleetly pass
  This world and all that's in it.
From the bumper that but crowns his glass,
  And is gone again next minute!

The diamond sleeps within the mine,
  The pearl beneath the water;
While Truth, more precious, dwells in wine.
  The grape's own rosy daughter.
And none can prize her charms like him,
  Oh, none like him obtain her,
Who thus can, like Leander, swim
  Thro' sparkling floods to gain her!






HERE SLEEPS THE BARD.

(HIGHLAND AIR.)


Here sleeps the Bard who knew so well
All the sweet windings of Apollo's shell;
Whether its music rolled like torrents near.
Or died, like distant streamlets, on the ear.
Sleep, sleep, mute bard; alike unheeded now
The storm and zephyr sweep thy lifeless brow;--
That storm, whose rush is like thy martial lay;
That breeze which, like thy love-song, dies away!






DO NOT SAY THAT LIFE IS WANING.


Do not say that life is waning,
  Or that hope's sweet day is set;
While I've thee and love remaining,
  Life is in the horizon yet.

Do not think those charms are flying,
  Tho' thy roses fade and fall;
Beauty hath a grace undying,
  Which in thee survives them all.

Not for charms, the newest, brightest,
  That on other cheeks may shine,
Would I change the least, the slightest.
  That is lingering now o'er thine.






THE GAZELLE.


Dost thou not hear the silver bell,
  Thro' yonder lime-trees ringing?
'Tis my lady's light gazelle;
  To me her love thoughts bringing,--
All the while that silver bell
  Around his dark neck ringing.

See, in his mouth he bears a wreath,
  My love hath kist in tying;
Oh, what tender thoughts beneath
  Those silent flowers are lying,--
Hid within the mystic wreath,
  My love hath kist in trying!

Welcome, dear gazelle, to thee,
  And joy to her, the fairest.
Who thus hath breathed her soul to me.
  In every leaf thou bearest;
Welcome, dear gazelle, to thee,
  And joy to her the fairest!

Hail ye living, speaking flowers,
  That breathe of her who bound ye;
Oh, 'twas not in fields, or bowers;
  'Twas on her lips, she found ye;--
Yes, ye blushing, speaking flowers,
  'Twas on her lips she found ye.






NO--LEAVE MY HEART TO REST.


No--leave my heart to rest, if rest it may,
When youth, and love, and hope, have past away.
Couldst thou, when summer hours are fled,
To some poor leaf that's fallen and dead,
Bring back the hue it wore, the scent it shed?
No--leave this heart to rest, if rest it may,
When youth, and love, and hope, have past away.

Oh, had I met thee then, when life was bright,
Thy smile might still have fed its tranquil light;
But now thou comest like sunny skies,
Too late to cheer the seaman's eyes,
When wrecked and lost his bark before him lies!
No--leave this heart to rest, if rest it may,
Since youth, and love, and hope have past away.






WHERE ARE THE VISIONS.


"Where are the visions that round me once hovered,
  "Forms that shed grace from their shadows alone;
"Looks fresh as light from a star just discovered,
  "And voices that Music might take for her own?"
Time, while I spoke, with his wings resting o'er me,
  Heard me say, "Where are those visions, oh where?"
And pointing his wand to the sunset before me,
  Said, with a voice like the hollow wind, "There."

Fondly I looked, when the wizard had spoken,
  And there, mid the dim-shining ruins of day,
Saw, by their light, like a talisman broken,
  The last golden fragments of hope melt away.






WIND THY HORN, MY HUNTER BOY.


Wind thy horn, my hunter boy,
  And leave thy lute's inglorious sighs;
Hunting is the hero's joy,
  Till war his nobler game supplies.
Hark! the hound-bells ringing sweet,
While hunters shout and the, woods repeat,
                 Hilli-ho! Hilli-ho!

Wind again thy cheerful horn,
  Till echo, faint with answering, dies:
Burn, bright torches, burn till morn,
  And lead us where the wild boar lies.
Hark! the cry, "He's found, he's found,"
While hill and valley our shouts resound.
                 Hilli-ho! Hilli-ho!






OH, GUARD OUR AFFECTION.


Oh, guard our affection, nor e'er let it feel
The blight that this world o'er the warmest will steal:
While the faith of all round us is fading or past,
Let ours, ever green, keep its bloom to the last.

Far safer for Love 'tis to wake and to weep,
As he used in his prime, than go smiling to sleep;
For death on his slumber, cold death follows fast,
White the love that is wakeful lives on to the last.

And tho', as Time gathers his clouds o'er our head,
A shade somewhat darker o'er life they may spread,
Transparent, at least, be the shadow they cast,
So that Love's softened light may shine thro' to the last.






SLUMBER, OH SLUMBER.


"Slumber, oh slumber; if sleeping thou mak'st
"My heart beat so wildly, I'm lost if thou wak'st."
  Thus sung I to a maiden,
    Who slept one summer's day,
  And, like a flower overladen
    With too much sunshine, lay.
      Slumber, oh slumber, etc.

"Breathe not, oh breathe not, ye winds, o'er her cheeks;
"If mute thus she charm me, I'm lost when she speaks."
  Thus sing I, while, awaking,
    She murmurs words that seem
  As if her lips were taking
    Farewell of some sweet dream.
      Breathe not, oh breathe not, etc.






BRING THE BRIGHT GARLANDS HITHER.


Bring the bright garlands hither,
  Ere yet a leaf is dying;
If so soon they must wither.
  Ours be their last sweet sighing.
Hark, that low dismal chime!
'Tis the dreary voice of Time.
Oh, bring beauty, bring roses,
  Bring all that yet is ours;
Let life's day, as it closes,
  Shine to the last thro' flowers.

Haste, ere the bowl's declining,
  Drink of it now or never;
Now, while Beauty is shining,
  Love, or she's lost for ever.
Hark! again that dull chime,
'Tis the dreary voice of Time.
Oh, if life be a torrent,
  Down to oblivion going,
Like this cup be its current,
  Bright to the last drop flowing!






IF IN LOVING, SINGING.


If in loving, singing, night and day
We could trifle merrily life away,
Like atoms dancing in the beam,
Like day-flies skimming o'er the stream,
Or summer blossoms, born to sigh
Their sweetness out, and die--
How brilliant, thoughtless, side by side,
Thou and I could make our minutes glide!
No atoms ever glanced so bright,
No day-flies ever danced so light,
Nor summer blossoms mixt their sigh,
So close, as thou and I!






THOU LOVEST NO MORE.


Too plain, alas, my doom is spoken
  Nor canst thou veil the sad truth o'er;
Thy heart is changed, thy vow is broken,
  Thou lovest no more--thou lovest no more.

Tho' kindly still those eyes behold me,
  The smile is gone, which once they wore;
Tho' fondly still those arms enfold me,
  'Tis not the same--thou lovest no more.

Too long my dream of bliss believing,
  I've thought thee all thou wert before;
But now--alas! there's no deceiving,
  'Tis all too plain, thou lovest no more.

Oh, thou as soon the dead couldst waken,
  As lost affection's life restore,
Give peace to her that is forsaken,
  Or bring back him who loves no more.






WHEN ABROAD IN THE WORLD.


When abroad in the world thou appearest.
  And the young and the lovely are there,
To my heart while of all thou'rt the dearest.
  To my eyes thou'rt of all the most fair.
    They pass, one by one,
      Like waves of the sea,
    That say to the Sun,
      "See, how fair we can be."
  But where's the light like thine,
  In sun or shade to shine?
No--no, 'mong them all, there is nothing like thee,
      Nothing like thee.

Oft, of old, without farewell or warning,
  Beauty's self used to steal from the skies;
Fling a mist round her head, some fine morning,
  And post down to earth in disguise;
    But, no matter what shroud
      Around her might be,
    Men peeped through the cloud,
      And whispered, "'Tis She."
  So thou, where thousands are,
  Shinest forth the only star,--
Yes, yes, 'mong them all, there is nothing like thee,
      Nothing like thee.






KEEP THOSE EYES STILL PURELY MINE.


Keep those eyes still purely mine,
  Tho' far off I be:
When on others most they shine,
  Then think they're turned on me.

Should those lips as now respond
  To sweet minstrelsy,
When their accents seem most fond,
  Then think they're breathed for me.

Make what hearts thou wilt thy own,
  If when all on thee
Fix their charmed thoughts alone,
  Thou think'st the while on me.






HOPE COMES AGAIN.


Hope comes again, to this heart long a stranger,
  Once more she sings me her flattering strain;
But hush, gentle syren--for, ah, there's less danger
  In still suffering on, than in hoping again.

Long, long, in sorrow, too deep for repining,
  Gloomy, but tranquil, this bosom hath lain:
And joy coming now, like a sudden light shining
  O'er eyelids long darkened, would bring me but pain.

Fly then, ye visions, that Hope would shed o'er me;
  Lost to the future, my sole chance of rest
Now lies not in dreaming of bliss that's before me.
  But, ah--in forgetting how once I was blest.






O SAY, THOU BEST AND BRIGHTEST.


O say, thou best and brightest,
  My first love and my last.
When he, whom now thou slightest,
  From life's dark scene hath past,
Will kinder thoughts then move thee?
  Will pity wake one thrill
For him who lived to love thee,
  And dying loved thee still?

If when, that hour recalling
  From which he dates his woes,
Thou feel'st a tear-drop falling,
  Ah, blush not while it flows;
But, all the past forgiving,
  Bend gently o'er his shrine,
And say, "This heart, when living,
  "With all its faults, was mine."






WHEN NIGHT BRINGS THE HOUR.


When night brings the hour
  Of starlight and joy,
There comes to my bower
  A fairy-winged boy;
With eyes so bright,
  So full of wild arts,
Like nets of light,
  To tangle young hearts;
With lips, in whose keeping
  Love's secret may dwell,
Like Zephyr asleep in
  Some rosy sea-shell.
Guess who he is,
  Name but his name,
And his best kiss
  For reward you may claim.

Where'er o'er the ground
  He prints his light feet.
The flowers there are found
  Most shining and sweet:
His looks, as soft
  As lightning in May,
Tho' dangerous oft,
  Ne'er wound but in play:
And oh, when his wings
  Have brushed o'er my lyre,
You'd fancy its strings
  Were turning to fire.
Guess who he is,
  Name but his name,
And his best kiss
  For reward you may claim.






LIKE ONE WHO, DOOMED.


Like one who, doomed o'er distant seas
  His weary path to measure,
When home at length, with favoring breeze,
  He brings the far-sought treasure;

His ship, in sight of shore, goes down,
  That shore to which he hasted;
And all the wealth he thought his own
  Is o'er the waters wasted!

Like him, this heart, thro' many a track
  Of toil and sorrow straying,
One hope alone brought fondly back,
  Its toil and grief repaying.

Like him, alas, I see that ray
  Of hope before me perish,
And one dark minute sweep away
  What years were given to cherish.






FEAR NOT THAT, WHILE AROUND THEE.


Fear not that, while around thee
  Life's varied blessings pour,
One sigh of hers shall wound thee,
  Whose smile thou seek'st no more.
No, dead and cold for ever
  Let our past love remain;
Once gone, its spirit never
  Shall haunt thy rest again.

May the new ties that bind thee
  Far sweeter, happier prove,
Nor e'er of me remind thee,
  But by their truth and love.
Think how, asleep or waking,
  Thy image haunts me yet;
But, how this heart is breaking
  For thy own peace forget.






WHEN LOVE IS KIND.


When Love is kind,
  Cheerful and free,
Love's sure to find
  Welcome from me.

But when Love brings
  Heartache or pang,
Tears, and such things--
  Love may go hang!

If Love can sigh
  For one alone,
Well pleased am I
  To be that one,

But should I see
  Love given to rove
To two or three,
  Then--good by Love!

Love must, in short,
  Keep fond and true,
Thro' good report,
  And evil too.

Else, here I swear,
  Young Love may go.
For aught I care--
  To Jericho.






THE GARLAND I SEND THEE.


The Garland I send thee was culled from those bowers
Where thou and I wandered in long vanished hours;
Not a leaf or a blossom its bloom here displays,
But bears some remembrance of those happy days.

The roses were gathered by that garden gate,
Where our meetings, tho' early, seemed always too late;
Where lingering full oft thro' a summer-night's moon,
Our partings, tho' late, appeared always too soon.

The rest were all culled from the banks of that glade,
Where, watching the sunset, so often we've strayed,
And mourned, as the time went, that Love had no power
To bind in his chain even one happy hour.






HOW SHALL I WOO?


If I speak to thee in friendship's name,
  Thou think'st I speak too coldly;
If I mention Love's devoted flame,
  Thou say'st I speak too boldly.
Between these two unequal fires,
  Why doom me thus to hover?
I'm a friend, if such thy heart requires,
  If more thou seek'st, a lover.
Which shall it be? How shall I woo?
  Fair one, choose between the two.

Tho' the wings of Love will brightly play,
  When first he comes to woo thee,
There's a chance that he may fly away,
  As fast as he flies _to_ thee.
While Friendship, tho' on foot she come,
  No flights of fancy trying,
Will, therefore, oft be found at home,
  When Love abroad is flying.
Which shall it be? How shall I woo?
  Dear one, choose between the two.

If neither feeling suits thy heart
  Let's see, to please thee, whether
We may not learn some precious art
  To mix their charms together;
One feeling, still more sweet, to form
  From two so sweet already--
A friendship that like love is warm,
  A love like friendship steady.
Thus let it be, thus let me woo,
  Dearest, thus we'll join the two.






SPRING AND AUTUMN.


Every season hath its pleasures;
  Spring may boast her flowery prime,
Yet the vineyard's ruby treasures
  Brighten Autumn's soberer time.
So Life's year begins and closes;
  Days tho' shortening still can shine;
What tho' youth gave love and roses,
  Age still leaves us friends and wine.

Phillis, when she might have caught me,
  All the Spring looked coy and shy,
Yet herself in Autumn sought me,
  When the flowers were all gone by.
Ah, too late;--she found her lover
  Calm and free beneath his vine,
Drinking to the Spring-time over,
  In his best autumnal wine.

Thus may we, as years are flying,
  To their flight our pleasures suit,
Nor regret the blossoms dying,
  While we still may taste the fruit,
Oh, while days like this are ours,
  Where's the lip that dares repine?
Spring may take our loves and flowers,
  So Autumn leaves us friends and wine.






LOVE ALONE.


If thou wouldst have thy charms enchant our eyes,
First win our hearts, for there thy empire lies:
Beauty in vain would mount a heartless throne,
Her Right Divine is given by Love alone.

What would the rose with all her pride be worth,
Were there no sun to call her brightness forth?
Maidens, unloved, like flowers in darkness thrown,
Wait but that light which comes from Love alone.

Fair as thy charms in yonder glass appear,
Trust not their bloom, they'll fade from year to year:
Wouldst thou they still should shine as first they shone,
Go, fix thy mirror in Love's eyes alone.








SACRED SONGS




TO

EDWARD TUITE DALTON, ESQ.

THE FIRST NUMBER

OF

SACRED SONGS

IS INSCRIBED,

BY HIS SINCERE AND AFFECTIONATE FRIEND,

THOMAS MOORE.

_Mayfield Cottage, Ashbourne_,
      _May, 1816_






SACRED SONGS






THOU ART, O GOD.

(Air.--Unknown.)[1]


    "The day is thine, the night is also thine: thou hast prepared the
    light and the sun.

    "Thou hast set all the borders of the earth: thou hast made summer and
    winter."
    --_Psalm_ lxxiv. 16, 17.


Thou art, O God, the life and light
  Of all this wondrous world we see;
Its glow by day, its smile by night,
  Are but reflections caught from Thee.
Where'er we turn, thy glories shine,
  And all things fair and bright are Thine!

When Day, with farewell beam, delays
  Among the opening clouds of Even,
And we can almost think we gaze
  Thro' golden vistas into Heaven--
Those hues, that make the Sun's decline
So soft, so radiant, LORD! are Thine.

When Night, with wings of starry gloom,
  O'ershadows all the earth and skies,
Like some dark, beauteous bird, whose plume
  Is sparkling with unnumbered eyes--
That sacred gloom, those fires divine,
So grand, so countless, LORD! are Thine.

When youthful Spring around us breathes,
  Thy Spirit warms her fragrant sigh;
And every flower the Summer wreaths
  Is born beneath that kindling eye.
Where'er we turn, thy glories shine,
And all things fair and bright are Thine.


[1] I have heard that this air is by the late Mrs. Sheridan. It is sung to
the beautiful old words, "I do confess thou'rt smooth and fair."






THE BIRD, LET LOOSE.

(AIR.--BEETHOVEN.)


The bird, let loose in eastern skies,[1]
  When hastening fondly home,
Ne'er stoops to earth her wing, nor flies
  Where idle warblers roam.
But high she shoots thro' air and light,
  Above all low delay,
Where nothing earthly bounds her flight,
  Nor shadow dims her way.

So grant me, GOD, from every care
  And stain of passion free,
Aloft, thro' Virtue's purer air,
  To hold my course to Thee!
No sin to cloud, no lure to stay
  My Soul, as home she springs;--

Thy Sunshine on her joyful way,
  Thy Freedom in her wings!


[1] The carrier-pigeon, it is well known, flies at an elevated pitch, in
order to surmount every obstacle between her and the place to which she is
destined.






FALLEN IS THY THRONE.

(AIR.--MARTINI.)


Fallen is thy Throne, oh Israel!
  Silence is o'er thy plains;
Thy dwellings all lie desolate,
  Thy children weep in chains.
Where are the dews that fed thee
  On Etham's barren shore?
That fire from Heaven which led thee,
  Now lights thy path no more.

LORD! thou didst love Jerusalem--
  Once she was all thy own;
Her love thy fairest heritage,[1]
  Her power thy glory's throne.[2]
Till evil came, and blighted
  Thy long-loved olive-tree;[3]--
And Salem's shrines were lighted
  For other gods than Thee.

Then sunk the star of Solyma--
  Then past her glory's day,
Like heath that, in the wilderness,[4]
  The wild wind whirls away.
Silent and waste her bowers,
  Where once the mighty trod,
And sunk those guilty towers,
  While Baal reign'd as God.

"Go"--said the LORD--"Ye Conquerors!
  "Steep in her blood your swords,
"And raze to earth her battlements,[5]
  "For they are not the LORD'S.
"Till Zion's mournful daughter
  "O'er kindred bones shall tread,
"And Hinnom's vale of slaughter[6]
  "Shall hide but half her dead!"


[1] "I have left mine heritage; I have given the clearly beloved of my
soul into the hands of her enemies."--_Jeremiah_, xii. 7.

[2] "Do not disgrace the throne of thy glory."--_Jer_. xiv. 21.

[3] "The LORD called by name a green olive-tree; fair, and of goodly
fruit," etc.--_Jer_. xi. 16.

[4] "For he shall be like the heath in the desert."--_Jer_. xvii, 6.

[5] "Take away her battlements; for they are not the LORD'S."--_Jer_. v.
10.

[6] "Therefore, behold, the days come, saith the LORD, that it shall no
more be called Tophet, nor the Valley of the Son of Hinnom, but the Valley
or Slaughter; for they shall bury in Tophet till there be no place."--
_Jer_. vii. 32.






WHO IS THE MAID?

ST. JEROME'S LOVE.

(AIR.--BEETHOVEN.)


Who is the Maid my spirit seeks,
  Thro' cold reproof and slander's blight?
Has _she_ Love's roses on her cheeks?
  Is _hers_ an eye of this world's light?
No--wan and sunk with midnight prayer
  Are the pale looks of her I love;
Or if at times a light be there,
  Its beam is kindled from above.

I chose not her, my heart's elect,
  From those who seek their Maker's shrine
In gems and garlands proudly decked,
  As if themselves were things divine.
No--Heaven but faintly warms the breast
  That beats beneath a broidered veil;
And she who comes in glittering vest
  To mourn her frailty, still is frail.

Not so the faded form I prize
  And love, because its bloom is gone;
The glory in those sainted eyes
  Is all the grace _her_ brow puts on.
And ne'er was Beauty's dawn so bright,
  So touching as that form's decay,
Which, like the altar's trembling light,
  In holy lustre wastes away.






THIS WORLD IS ALL A FLEETING SHOW.

(AIR.--STEVENSON.)


This world is all a fleeting show,
  For man's illusion given;
The smiles of joy, the tears of woe,
Deceitful shine, deceitful flow--
  There's nothing true but Heaven!

And false the light on glory's plume,
  As fading hues of even;
And love and hope, and beauty's bloom,
Are blossoms gathered for the tomb--
  There's nothing bright but Heaven!

Poor wanderers of a stormy day,
  From wave to wave we're driven,
And fancy's flash and reason's ray
Serve but to light the troubled way--
  There's nothing calm but Heaven!






OH THOU WHO DRY'ST THE MOURNER'S TEAR.

(AIR.--HAYDN.)


    "He healeth the broken in heart and bindeth up their wounds,"
    --_Psalm_. cxlvii. 3.


Oh Thou who dry'st the mourner's tear,
  How dark this world would be,
If, when deceived and wounded here,
  We could not fly to Thee.
The friends who in our sunshine live,
  When winter comes, are flown;
And he who has but tears to give,
  Must weep those tears alone.
But Thou wilt heal that broken heart,
  Which, like the plants that throw
Their fragrance from the wounded part,
  Breathes sweetness out of woe.

When joy no longer soothes or cheers,
  And even the hope that threw
A moment's sparkle o'er our tears
  Is dimmed and vanished too,
Oh, who would bear life's stormy doom,
  Did not thy Wing of Love
Come, brightly wafting thro' the gloom
  Our Peace-branch from above?
Then sorrow, touched by Thee, grows bright
  With more than rapture's ray;
As darkness shows us worlds of light
  We never saw by day!






WEEP NOT FOR THOSE.

(AIR.--AVISON.)


Weep not for those whom the veil of the tomb,
  In life's happy morning, hath hid from our eyes,
Ere sin threw a blight o'er the spirit's young bloom,
  Or earth had profaned what was born for the skies.
Death chilled the fair fountain, ere sorrow had stained it;
  'Twas frozen in all the pure light of its course,
And but sleeps till the sunshine of Heaven has unchained it,
  To water that Eden where first was its source.
Weep not for those whom the veil of the tomb,
  In life's happy morning, hath hid from our eyes,
Ere sin threw a blight o'er the spirit's young bloom,
  Or earth had profaned what was born for the skies.

Mourn not for her, the young Bride of the Vale,[1]
  Our gayest and loveliest, lost to us now,
Ere life's early lustre had time to grow pale,
  And the garland of Love was yet fresh on her brow.
Oh, then was her moment, dear spirit, for flying
  From this gloomy world, while its gloom was unknown--
And the wild hymns she warbled so sweetly, in dying,
  Were echoed in Heaven by lips like her own.
Weep not for her--in her springtime she flew
  To that land where the wings of the soul are unfurled;
And now, like a star beyond evening's cold dew,
  Looks radiantly down on the tears of this world.


[1] This second verse, which I wrote long after the first, alludes to the
fate of a very lovely and amiable girl, the daughter of the late Colonel
Bainbrigge, who was married in Ashbourne church, October 81, 1815, and
died of a fever in a few weeks after. The sound of her marriage-bells
seemed scarcely out of our ears when we heard of her death. During her
last delirium she sung several hymns, in a voice even clearer and sweeter
than usual, and among them were some from the present collection,
(particularly, "There's nothing bright but Heaven,") which this very
interesting girl had often heard me sing during the summer.






THE TURF SHALL BE MY FRAGRANT SHRINE.

(AIR.--STEVENSON.)


The turf shall be my fragrant shrine;
My temple, LORD! that Arch of thine;
My censer's breath the mountain airs,
And silent thoughts my only prayers.

My choir shall be the moonlight waves,
When murmuring homeward to their caves,
Or when the stillness of the sea,
Even more than music dreams of Thee!

I'll seek, by day, some glade unknown,
All light and silence, like thy Throne;
And the pale stars shall be, at night,
The only eyes that watch my rite.

Thy Heaven, on which 'tis bliss to look,
Shall be my pure and shining book,
Where I shall read, in words of flame,
The glories of thy wondrous name.

I'll read thy anger in the rack
That clouds awhile the day-beam's track;
Thy mercy in the azure hue
Of sunny brightness, breaking thro'.

There's nothing bright, above, below,
From flowers that bloom to stars that glow,
But in its light my soul can see
Some feature of thy Deity:

There's nothing dark, below, above,
But in its gloom I trace thy Love,
And meekly wait that moment, when
Thy touch shall turn all bright again!






SOUND THE LOUD TIMBREL.

MIRIAM'S SONG.

(AlR.--AVISON.)[1]


    "And Miriam, the Prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took a timbrel in
    her band; and all the women went out after her with timbrels and with
    dances."
    --_Exod_. xv. 20.


Sound the loud Timbrel o'er Egypt's dark sea!
JEHOVAH has triumphed--his people are free.
Sing--for the pride of the Tyrant is broken,
  His chariots, his horsemen, all splendid and brave--
How vain was their boast, for the LORD hath but spoken,
  And chariots and horsemen are sunk in the wave.
Sound the loud Timbrel o'er Egypt's dark sea;
JEHOVAH has triumphed--his people are free.

Praise to the Conqueror, praise to the LORD!
His word was our arrow, his breath was our sword--
Who shall return to tell Egypt the story
  Of those she sent forth in the hour of her pride?
For the LORD hath looked out from his pillar of glory,[2]
  And all her brave thousands are dashed in the tide.
Sound the loud Timbrel o'er Egypt's dark sea,
JEHOVAH has triumphed--his people are free!


[1] I have so much altered the character of this air, which is from the
beginning of one of Avison's old-fashioned concertos, that, without this
acknowledgment, it could hardly, I think, be recognized.

[2] "And it came to pass, that, in the morning watch the LORD looked unto
the host of the Egyptians, through the pillar of fire and of the cloud,
and troubled the host of the Egyptians."--_Exod_. xiv. 24.






GO, LET ME WEEP.

(AIR.--STEVENSON.)


Go, let me weep--there's bliss in tears,
When he who sheds them inly feels
Some lingering stain of early years
  Effaced by every drop that steals.
The fruitless showers of worldly woe
Fall dark to earth and never rise;
While tears that from repentance flow,
  In bright exhalement reach the skies.
    Go, let me weep.

Leave me to sigh o'er hours that flew
More idly than the summer's wind,
And, while they past, a fragrance threw,
But left no trace of sweets behind.--
The warmest sigh that pleasure heaves
Is cold, is faint to those that swell
The heart where pure repentance grieves
  O'er hours of pleasure, loved too well.
    Leave me to sigh.






COME NOT, OH LORD.

(AIR.--HAYDN.)


Come not, oh LORD, in the dread robe of splendor
  Thou worest on the Mount, in the day of thine ire;
Come veiled in those shadows, deep, awful, but tender,
  Which Mercy flings over thy features of fire!

LORD, thou rememberest the night, when thy Nation[1]
  Stood fronting her Foe by the red-rolling stream;
O'er Egypt thy pillar shed dark desolation,
  While Israel basked all the night in its beam.

So, when the dread clouds of anger enfold Thee,
  From us, in thy mercy, the dark side remove;
While shrouded in terrors the guilty behold Thee,
  Oh, turn upon us the mild light of thy Love!


[1] "And it came between the camp of the Egyptians and the camp of Israel;
and it was a cloud and darkness to them, but it gave light by night to
these"--_Exod_. xiv. 20.






WERE NOT THE SINFUL MARY'S TEARS.

(AIR.--STEVENSON.)


Were not the sinful Mary's tears
  An offering worthy Heaven,
When, o'er the faults of former years,
  She wept--and was forgiven?

When, bringing every balmy sweet
  Her day of luxury stored,
She o'er her Saviour's hallowed feet
  The precious odors poured;--
And wiped them with that golden hair,
  Where once the diamond shone;
Tho' now those gems of grief were there
  Which shine for GOD alone!

Were not those sweets, so humbly shed--
  That hair--those weeping eyes--
And the sunk heart, that inly bled--
  Heaven's noblest sacrifice?

Thou that hast slept in error's sleep,
  Oh, would'st thou wake in Heaven,
Like Mary kneel, like Mary weep,
  "Love much" and be forgiven![1]


[1] "Her sins, which are many, are forgiven; for she loved much."--St.
Luke, vii.47.






AS DOWN IN THE SUNLESS RETREATS.

(AIR.--HAYDN.)


As down in the sunless retreats of the Ocean,
  Sweet flowers are springing no mortal can see,
So, deep in my soul the still prayer of devotion,
  Unheard by the world, rises silent to Thee,
    My God! silent to Thee--
    Pure, warm, silent, to Thee,

As still to the star of its worship, tho' clouded,
  The needle points faithfully o'er the dim sea,
So, dark as I roam, in this wintry world shrouded,
  The hope of my spirit turns trembling to Thee,
    My GOD! trembling to Thee--
    True, fond, trembling, to Thee.






BUT WHO SHALL SEE.

(AIR.--STEVENSON.)


But who shall see the glorious day
  When, throned on Zion's brow,
The LORD shall rend that veil away
  Which hides the nations now?[1]
When earth no more beneath the fear
  Of this rebuke shall lie;[2]
When pain shall cease, and every tear
  Be wiped from every eye.[3]

Then, Judah, thou no more shall mourn
  Beneath the heathen's chain;
Thy days of splendor shall return,
  And all be new again.[4]

The Fount of Life shall then be quaft
  In peace, by all who come;[5]
And every wind that blows shall waft
  Some long-lost exile home.


[1] "And he will destroy, in this mountain, the face of the covering cast
over all people, and the vail that is spread over all nations."--Isaiah,
xxv. 7.

[2] "The rebuke of his people shall he take away from off all the
earth."--Isaiah, xxv. 8.

[3] "And GOD shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; neither shall
there be any more pain."--Rev. xxi:4.

[4] "And he that sat upon the throne said, Behold, I make all things
new."--Rev. xxi. 5.

[5] "And whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely."--Rev.
xxii. 17.






ALMIGHTY GOD!

CHORUS OF PRIESTS.

(AIR.--MOZART.)


Almighty GOD! when round thy shrine
The Palm-tree's heavenly branch we twine,[1]
(Emblem of Life's eternal ray,
And Love that "fadeth not away,")
We bless the flowers, expanded all,[2]
We bless the leaves that never fall,

And trembling say,--"In Eden thus
"The Tree of Life may flower for us!"
When round thy Cherubs--smiling calm,
Without their flames--we wreathe the Palm.
Oh God! we feel the emblem true--
Thy Mercy is eternal too,
Those Cherubs, with their smiling eyes,
That crown of Palm which never dies,
Are but the types of Thee above--
Eternal Life, and Peace, and Love!


[1] "The Scriptures having declared that the Temple of Jerusalem was a
type of the Messiah, it is natural to conclude that the Palms, which made
so conspicuous a figure in that structure, represented that Life and
Immortality which were brought to light by the Gospel."--"Observations on
the Palm, as a sacred Emblem," by W. Tighe.

[2] "And he carved all the walls of the house round about with carved
figures of cherubim, and palm-trees, and _open flowers_."--1 Kings,
VI. 29.






OH FAIR! OH PUREST!

SAINT AUGUSTINE TO HIS SISTER.

(AIR.--MOORE)


Oh fair! oh purest! be thou the dove
That flies alone to some sunny grove,
And lives unseen, and bathes her wing,
All vestal white, in the limpid spring.
There, if the hovering hawk be near,
That limpid spring in its mirror clear
Reflects him ere he reach his prey
And warns the timorous bird away,
     Be thou this dove;
Fairest, purest, be thou this dove,

The sacred pages of God's own book
Shall be the spring, the eternal brook,
In whose holy mirror, night and day,
Thou'lt study Heaven's reflected ray;--
And should the foes of virtue dare,
With gloomy wing, to seek thee there,
Thou wilt see how dark their shadows lie
Between Heaven and thee, and trembling fly!
    Be thou that dove;
Fairest, purest, be thou that dove.






ANGEL OF CHARITY.

(AIR.--HANDEL)


Angel of Charity, who, from above,
  Comest to dwell a pilgrim here,
Thy voice is music, thy smile is love,
  And Pity's soul is in thy tear.
When on the shrine of God were laid
  First-fruits of all most good and fair,
That ever bloomed in Eden's shade,
  Thine was the holiest offering there.

Hope and her sister, Faith, were given
  But as our guides to yonder sky;
Soon as they reach the verge of heaven,
  There, lost in perfect bliss, they die.
But, long as Love, Almighty Love,
  Shall on his throne of thrones abide,
Thou, Charity, shalt dwell above,
  Smiling for ever by His side!






BEHOLD THE SUN.

(AIR.--LORD MORNINGTON.)


Behold the Sun, how bright
 From yonder East he springs,
As if the soul of life and light
 Were breathing from his wings.

So bright the Gospel broke
 Upon the souls of men;
So fresh the dreaming world awoke
 In Truth's full radiance then.

Before yon Sun arose,
 Stars clustered thro' the sky--
But oh how dim, how pale were those,
 To His one burning eye!

So Truth lent many a ray,
  To bless the Pagan's night--
But, Lord, how weak, how cold were they
  To Thy One glorious Light!






LORD, WHO SHALL BEAR THAT DAY.

(AIR.--DR. BOYCE.)


Lord, who shall bear that day, so dread, so splendid,
  When we shall see thy Angel hovering o'er
This sinful world with hand to heaven extended,
  And hear him swear by Thee that time's no more?[1]
When Earth shall feel thy fast consuming ray--
Who, Mighty God, oh who shall bear that day?

When thro' the world thy awful call hath sounded--
  "Wake, all ye Dead, to judgment wake, ye Dead!"
And from the clouds, by seraph eyes surrounded,
  The Saviour shall put forth his radiant head;[2]
While Earth and Heaven before Him pass away[3]--
Who, Mighty God, oh who shall bear that day?


When, with a glance, the Eternal Judge shall sever
  Earth's evil spirits from the pure and bright,
And say to _those_, "Depart from me for ever!"
  To _these_, "Come, dwell with me in endless light!"[4]
When each and all in silence take their way--
Who, Mighty God, oh who shall bear that day?


[1] And the angel which I saw stand upon the sea and upon the earth,
lifted up his hand to heaven, and swear by Him that liveth for ever and
ever...that there should be time no longer."--_Rev_. x. 5, 6.

[2] "They shall see the Son of Man coming in the clouds of heaven--and all
the angels with him."--_Matt_. xxiv. 90, and xxv. 80.

[3] "From whose face the earth and the heaven fled away."--_Rev_. xx. ii.

[4] "And before Him shall be gathered all nations, and He shall separate
them one from another.

"Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand, Come, ye blessed of
my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you, etc.

"Then shall He say also unto them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye
cursed, etc.

"And these shall go away into everlasting punishment; but the righteous
into life eternal."

--_Matt_ xxv. 32, _et seq_.






OH, TEACH ME TO LOVE THEE.

(AIR.--HAYDN.)


Oh, teach me to love Thee, to feel what thou art,
Till, filled with the one sacred image, my heart
  Shall all other passions disown;
Like some pure temple that shines apart,
  Reserved for Thy worship alone.

In joy and in sorrow, thro' praise and thro' blame,
Thus still let me, living and dying the same,
  In _Thy_ service bloom and decay--
Like some lone altar whose votive flame
  In holiness wasteth away.

Tho' born in this desert, and doomed by my birth
To pain and affliction, to darkness and dearth,
  On Thee let my spirit rely--
Like some rude dial, that, fixt on earth,
  Still looks for its light from the sky.






WEEP, CHILDREN OF ISRAEL.

(AIR.--STEVENSON.)


Weep, weep for him, the Man of God--[1]
  In yonder vale he sunk to rest;
But none of earth can point the sod[2]
  That flowers above his sacred breast.
    Weep, children of Israel, weep!

His doctrine fell like Heaven's rain.[3]
  His words refreshed like Heaven's dew--
Oh, ne'er shall Israel see again
  A Chief, to GOD and her so true.
    Weep, children of Israel, weep!

Remember ye his parting gaze,
  His farewell song by Jordan's tide,
When, full of glory and of days,
  He saw the promised land--and died.[4]
    Weep, children of Israel, weep!

Yet died he not as men who sink,
  Before our eyes, to soulless clay;
But, changed to spirit, like a wink
  Of summer lightning, past away.[5]
    Weep, children of Israel, weep!


[1] "And the children of Israel wept for Moses in the plains of Moab."--
_Deut_. xxxiv, 8.

[2] "And, he buried him in a valley in the land of Moab...but no man
knoweth of his sepulchre unto this day."--_Ibid_. ver. 6.

[3] "My doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distil as the
dew."--_Moses' Song_.

[4] "I have caused thee to see it with thine eyes, but thou shalt not go
over thither."--_Deut_. xxxiv. 4.

[5] "As he was going to embrace Eleazer and Joshua, and was still
discoursing with them, a cloud stood over him on the sudden, and he
disappeared in a certain valley, although he wrote in the Holy Books that
he died, which was done out of fear, lest they should venture to say that,
because of his extraordinary virtue, he went to GOD."--_Josephus_,
book iv. chap. viii.






LIKE MORNING, WHEN HER EARLY BREEZE.

(AIR. BEETHOVEN.)


Like morning, when her early breeze
Breaks up the surface of the seas,
That, in those furrows, dark with night,
Her hand may sow the seeds of light--

Thy Grace can send its breathings o'er
The Spirit, dark and lost before,
And, freshening all its depths, prepare
For Truth divine to enter there.

Till David touched his sacred lyre.
In silence lay the unbreathing wire;
But when he swept its chords along,
Even Angels stooped to hear that song.

So sleeps the soul, till Thou, oh LORD,
Shalt deign to touch its lifeless chord--
Till, waked by Thee, its breath shall rise
In music, worthy of the skies!






COME, YE DISCONSOLATE.

(AIR.--GERMAN.)


Come, ye disconsolate, where'er you languish,
  Come, at God's altar fervently kneel;
Here bring your wounded hearts, here tell your anguish--
  Earth has no sorrow that Heaven cannot heal.

Joy of the desolate, Light of the straying,
  Hope, when all others die, fadeless and pure,
Here speaks the Comforter, in GOD'S name saying--
  "Earth has no sorrow that Heaven cannot cure."

Go, ask the infidel, what boon he brings us
  What charm for aching hearts _he_ can reveal,
Sweet as that heavenly promise Hope sings us--
  "Earth has no sorrow that GOD cannot heal."






AWAKE, ARISE, THY LIGHT IS COME.

(AIR.--STEVENSON.)


Awake, arise, thy light is come;[1]
  The nations, that before outshone thee,
Now at thy feet lie dark and dumb--
  The glory of the Lord is on thee!

Arise--the Gentiles to thy ray,
  From every nook of earth shall cluster;
And kings and princes haste to pay
  Their homage to thy rising lustre.[2]

Lift up thine eyes around, and see
  O'er foreign fields, o'er farthest waters,
Thy exiled sons return to thee,
  To thee return thy home-sick daughters.[3]

And camels rich, from Midians' tents,
  Shall lay their treasures down before thee;
And Saba bring her gold and scents,
  To fill thy air and sparkle o'er thee.[4]

See, who are these that, like a cloud,[5]
  Are gathering from all earth's dominions,
Like doves, long absent, when allowed
  Homeward to shoot their trembling pinions.

Surely the isles shall wait for me,[6]
  The ships of Tarshish round will hover,
To bring thy sons across the sea,
  And waft their gold and silver over.

And Lebanon thy pomp shall grace[7]--
  The fir, the pine, the palm victorious
Shall beautify our Holy Place,
  And make the ground I tread on glorious.

No more shall dischord haunt thy ways,[8]
  Nor ruin waste thy cheerless nation;
But thou shalt call thy portal Praise,
  And thou shalt name thy walls Salvation.

The sun no more shall make thee bright,[9]
  Nor moon shall lend her lustre to thee;
But God, Himself, shall be thy Light,
  And flash eternal glory thro' thee.

Thy sun shall never more go down;
  A ray from heaven itself descended
Shall light thy everlasting crown--
  Thy days of mourning all are ended.[10]

My own, elect, and righteous Land!
  The Branch, for ever green and vernal,
Which I have planted with this hand--
  Live thou shalt in Life Eternal.[11]


[1] "Arise, shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is
risen upon thee."--_Isaiah_, xl.

[2] "And the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and kings to the brightness
of thy rising."--_Isaiah_, xl.

[3] "Lift up thine eyes round about, and see; all they gather themselves
together, they come to thee: thy sons shall come from afar, and thy
daughters shall be nursed at thy side."--_Isaiah_, lx.

[4] "The multitude of camels shall cover thee; the dromedaries of Midian
and Ephah; all they from Sheba shall come; they shall bring gold and
incense."--_Ib_.

[5] "Who are these that fly as a cloud and as the doves to their
windows?"--_Ib_.

[6] "Surely the isles shall wait for me, and the ships of Tarshish first,
to bring thy sons from far, their silver and their gold with
them."--_Ib_.

[7] "The glory of Lebanon shall come unto thee; the fir-tree, the
pine-tree, and the box together, to beautify the place of my sanctuary;
and I will make the place of my feet glorious."--_Ib_.

[8] "Violence shall no more be heard in thy land, wasting nor destruction
within thy borders; but thou shalt call thy walls, Salvation, and thy
gates, Praise.--_Isaiah_, lx.

[9] "Thy sun shall be no more thy light by day; neither for brightness
shall the moon give light unto thee: but the Lord shall be unto thee an
everlasting light, and thy God thy glory."--_Ib_.

[10] "Thy sun shall no more go down...for the Lord shall be thine
everlasting light, and the days of thy mourning shall be
ended."--_Ib_.

[11] "Thy people also shall be all righteous; they shall inherit the land
for ever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hands."--_Ib_.






THERE IS A BLEAK DESERT.

(AIR.--CRESCENTINI.)


There is a bleak Desert, where daylight grows weary
Of wasting its smile on a region so dreary--
  What may that Desert be?
'Tis Life, cheerless Life, where the few joys that come
Are lost, like that daylight, for 'tis not their home.

There is a lone Pilgrim, before whose faint eyes
The water he pants for but sparkles and flies--
  Who may that Pilgrim be?
'Tis Man, hapless Man, thro' this life tempted on
By fair shining hopes, that in shining are gone.

There is a bright Fountain, thro' that Desert stealing
To pure lips alone its refreshment revealing--
  What may that Fountain be?
'Tis Truth, holy Truth, that, like springs under ground,
By the gifted of Heaven alone can be found.

There is a fair Spirit whose wand hath the spell
To point where those waters in secrecy dwell--
  Who may that Spirit be?
'Tis Faith, humble Faith, who hath learned that where'er
Her wand bends to worship the Truth must be there!






SINCE FIRST THY WORD.

(AIR.--NICHOLAS FREEMAN.)


Since first Thy Word awaked my heart,
Like new life dawning o'er me,
Where'er I turn mine eyes, Thou art,
  All light and love before me.
Naught else I feel, or hear or see--
  All bonds of earth I sever--
Thee, O God, and only Thee
  I live for, now and ever.

Like him whose fetters dropt away
  When light shone o'er his prison,[1]
My spirit, touched by Mercy's ray,
  Hath from her chains arisen.
And shall a soul Thou bidst be free,
  Return to bondage?--never!
Thee, O God, and only Thee
  I live for, now and ever.


[1] "And, behold, the angel of the Lord came upon him, and a light shined
in the prison...and his chains fell off from his hands."--_Acts_,
xii. 7.






HARK! 'TIS THE BREEZE.

(AIR.--ROUSSEAU.)


Hark! 'tis the breeze of twilight calling;
  Earth's weary children to repose;
While, round the couch of Nature falling,
  Gently the night's soft curtains close.
Soon o'er a world, in sleep reclining,
  Numberless stars, thro' yonder dark,
Shall look, like eyes of Cherubs shining
  From out the veils that hid the Ark.

Guard us, oh Thou, who never sleepest,
  Thou who in silence throned above,
Throughout all time, unwearied, keepest
  Thy watch of Glory, Power, and Love.
Grant that, beneath thine eye, securely,
  Our souls awhile from life withdrawn
May in their darkness stilly, purely,
  Like "sealed fountains," rest till dawn.






WHERE IS YOUR DWELLING, YE SAINTED?

(AIR.--HASSE.)


Where is your dwelling, ye Sainted?
  Thro' what Elysium more bright
Than fancy or hope ever painted,
  Walk ye in glory and light?
Who the same kingdom inherits?
  Breathes there a soul that may dare
Look to that world of Spirits,
  Or hope to dwell with you there?

Sages! who even in exploring
  Nature thro' all her bright ways,
Went like the Seraphs adoring,
  And veiled your eyes in the blaze--
Martyrs! who left for our reaping
  Truths you had sown in your blood--
Sinners! whom, long years of weeping
  Chastened from evil to good--

Maidens! who like the young Crescent,
  Turning away your pale brows
From earth and the light of the Present,
  Looked to your Heavenly Spouse--
Say, thro' what region enchanted
  Walk ye in Heaven's sweet air?
Say, to what spirits 'tis granted,
  Bright, souls, to dwell with you there?






HOW LIGHTLY MOUNTS THE MUSE'S WING.

(AIR--ANONYMOUS.)


How lightly mounts the Muse's wing,
  Whose theme is in the skies--
Like morning larks that sweeter sing
  The nearer Heaven they rise,

Tho' love his magic lyre may tune,
  Yet ah, the flowers he round it wreathes,
Were plucked beneath pale Passion's moon,
  Whose madness in their ode breathes.

How purer far the sacred lute,
  Round which Devotion ties
Sweet flowers that turn to heavenly fruit,
  And palm that never dies.

Tho' War's high-sounding harp may be.,
  Most welcome to the hero's ears,
Alas, his chords of victory
  Are wet, all o'er, with human tears.

How far more sweet their numbers run,
  Who hymn like Saints above,
No victor but the Eternal One,
  No trophies but of Love!






GO FORTH TO THE MOUNT,

(AIR.--STEVENSON.)


Go forth to the Mount; bring the olive-branch home,[1]
And rejoice; for the day of our  freedom is come!
From that time,[2] when the moon upon Ajalon's vale,
  Looking motionless down,[3] saw the kings of the earth,
In the presence of God's mighty champion grow pale--
  Oh, never had Judah an hour of such mirth!
Go forth to the Mount--bring the olive-branch home,
And rejoice, for the day of our freedom is come!

Bring myrtle and palm--bring the boughs of each tree
That's worthy to wave o'er the tents of the Free.[4]
From that day when the footsteps of Israel shone
  With a light not their own, thro' the Jordan's deep tide,
Whose waters shrunk back as the ark glided on[5]--
  Oh, never had Judah an hour of such pride!
Go forth to the Mount--bring the olive-branch home,
And rejoice, for the day of our Freedom is come!


[1] And that they should publish and proclaim in all their cities, and in
Jerusalem, saying, "Go forth unto the mount, and fetch olive-branches,'!
etc.--_Neh_. viii. 15.

[2] "For since the days of Joshua the son of Nun unto that day had not the
children of Israel done so; and there was very great gladness."--
_Ib_. 17.

[3] "Sun, stand thou still upon Gibeon and thou Moon, in the valley of
Ajalon."--_Josh_. x. 12.

[4] "Fetch olive-branches, and pine-branches, and myrtle-branches, and
palm-branches, and branches of thick trees, to make booths."

--_Neh_. viii. 15.

[5] "And the priests that bare the ark of the covenant of the Lord stood
firm on dry ground in the midst of Jordan, and all the Israelites passed
over on dry ground."--_Josh_. iii. 17.






IS IT NOT SWEET TO THINK, HEREAFTER.

(AIR.--HAYDN.)


Is it not sweet to think, hereafter,
  When the Spirit leaves this sphere.
Love, with deathless wing, shall waft her
  To those she long hath mourned for here?

Hearts from which 'twas death to sever.
  Eyes this world can ne'er restore,
There, as warm, as bright as ever,
  Shall meet us and be lost no more.

When wearily we wander, asking
  Of earth and heaven, where are they,
Beneath whose smile we once lay basking,
  Blest and thinking bliss would stay?

Hope still lifts her radiant finger
  Pointing to the eternal Home,
Upon whose portal yet they linger,
  Looking back for us to come.

Alas, alas--doth Hope deceive us?
  Shall friendship--love--shall all those ties
That bind a moment, and then leave us,
  Be found again where nothing dies?

Oh, if no other boon were given,
  To keep our hearts from wrong and stain,
Who would not try to win a Heaven
  Where all we love shall live again?






WAR AGAINST BABYLON.

(AIR.--NOVELLO.)


"War against Babylon!" shout we around,
  Be our banners through earth unfurled;
Rise up, ye nations, ye kings, at the sound--
  "War against Babylon!" shout thro' the world!
Oh thou, that dwellest on many waters,[1]
  Thy day of pride is ended now;
And the dark curse of Israel's daughters
  Breaks like a thundercloud over thy brow!
    War, war, war against Babylon!

Make bright the arrows, and gather the shields,[2]
  Set the standard of God on high;
Swarm we, like locusts, o'er all her fields.
  "Zion" our watchword, and "vengeance" our cry!
Woe! woe!--the time of thy visitation[3]
  Is come, proud land, thy doom is cast--
And the black surge of desolation
  Sweeps o'er thy guilty head, at last!
      War, war, war against Babylon!


[1] "Oh thou that dwellest upon many waters...thine end is
come."--_Jer_. li. 13.

[2] "Make bright the arrows; gather the shields...set up the standard upon
the walls of Babylon"--_Jer_. li. 11, 12.

[3] "Woe unto them! for their day is come, the time of their
visitation!"--_Jer_. l. 27.








A MELOLOGUE UPON NATIONAL MUSIC.




ADVERTISEMENT.


These verses were written for a Benefit at the Dublin Theatre, and were
spoken by Miss Smith, with a degree of success, which they owed solely to
her admirable manner of reciting them. I wrote them in haste; and it very
rarely happens that poetry which has cost but little labor to the writer
is productive of any great pleasure to the reader. Under this impression,
I certainly should not have published them if they had not found their way
into some of the newspapers with such an addition of errors to their own
original stock, that I thought it but fair to limit their responsibility
to those faults alone which really belong to them.

With respect to the title which I have invented for this Poem, I feel even
more than the scruples of the Emperor Tiberius, when he humbly asked
pardon of the Roman Senate for using "the outlandish term, _monopoly_."
But the truth is, having  written the Poem with the sole view of serving a
Benefit, I thought that an unintelligible word of this kind would not be
without its attraction for the multitude, with whom, "If 'tis not sense,
at least 'tis Greek." To some of my readers, however, it may not be
superfluous to say, that by "Melologue," I mean that mixture of recitation
of music, which is frequently adopted in the performance of Collins's Ode
on the Passions, and of which the most striking example I can remember is
the prophetic speech of Joad in the Athalie of Racine.

T.M.






MELOLOGUE






A SHORT STRAIN OF MUSIC FROM THE ORCHESTRA.


_There_ breathes a language known and felt
  Far as the pure air spreads its living zone;
Wherever rage can rouse, or pity melt,
  That language of the soul is felt and known.
    From those meridian plains,
  Where oft, of old, on some high tower
The soft Peruvian poured his midnight strains,
And called his distant love with such sweet power,
  That, when she heard the lonely lay,
Not worlds could keep her from his arms away,[1]
  To the bleak climes of polar night,
  Where blithe, beneath a sunless sky,
The Lapland lover bids his reindeer fly,
And sings along the lengthening waste of snow,
  Gayly as if the blessed light
  Of vernal Phoebus burned upon his brow;
    Oh Music! thy celestial claim
    Is still resistless, still the same;
    And, faithful as the mighty sea
  To the pale star that o'er its realm presides,
    The spell-bound tides
Of human passion rise and fall for thee!


[1] "A certain Spaniard, one night late, met an Indian woman in the
streets of Cozco, and would have taken her to his home, but she cried out,
'For God's sake, Sir, let me go; for that pipe, which you hear in yonder
tower, calls me with great passion, and I cannot refuse the summons; for
love constrains me to go, that I may be his wife, and he my
husband.'"--"_Garcilasso de la Vga_," in Sir Paul Ryeaut's translation.






GREEK AIR


    List! 'tis a Grecian maid that sings,
    While, from Ilissus' silvery springs,
  She draws the cool lymph in her graceful urn;
And by her side, in Music's charm dissolving,
Some patriot youth, the glorious past revolving,
  Dreams of bright days that never can return;
    When Athens nurst her olive bough
      With hands by tyrant power unchained;
    And braided for the muse's brow
      A wreath by tyrant touch unstained.
    When heroes trod each classic field
      Where coward feet now faintly falter;
    When every arm was Freedom's shield,
      And every heart was Freedom's altar!






FLOURISH OF TRUMPETS.


    Hark, 'tis the sound that charms
    The war-steed's wakening ears!--
  Oh! many a mother folds her arms
Round her boy-soldier when that call she hears;
  And, tho' her fond heart sink with fears,
  Is proud to feel his young pulse bound
  With valor's fever at the sound.
  See, from his native hills afar
  The rude Helvetian flies to war;
  Careless for what, for whom he fights,
  For slave or despot, wrongs or rights:
    A conqueror oft--a hero never--
  Yet lavish of his life-blood still,
  As if 'twere like his mountain rill,
    And gushed forever!

    Yes, Music, here, even here,
  Amid this thoughtless, vague career,
Thy soul-felt charm asserts its wondrous power.--
  There's a wild air which oft, among the rocks
Of his own loved land, at evening hour,
  Is heard, when shepherds homeward pipe their flocks,
Whose every note hath power to thrill his mind
  With tenderest thoughts; to bring around his knees
The rosy children whom he left behind,
    And fill each little angel eye
    With speaking tears, that ask him why
  He wandered from his hut for scenes like these.
Vain, vain is then the trumpet's brazen roar;
  Sweet notes of home, of love, are all he hears;
And the stern eyes that looked for blood before
  Now melting, mournful, lose themselves in tears.






SWISS AIR.--"RANZ DES VACHES."


    But wake, the trumpet's blast again,
    And rouse the ranks of warrior-men!
  Oh War, when Truth thy arm employs,
And Freedom's spirit guides the laboring storm,
'Tis then thy vengeance takes a hallowed form,
And like Heaven's lightning sacredly destroys.
Nor, Music, thro' thy breathing sphere,
Lives there a sound more grateful to the ear
    Of Him who made all harmony,
    Than the blest sound of fetters breaking,
    And the first hymn that man awaking
  From Slavery's slumber breathes to Liberty.






SPANISH CHORUS.


  Hark! from Spain, indignant Spain,
  Burst the bold, enthusiast strain,
  Like morning's music on the air;
  And seems in every note to swear
  By Saragossa's ruined streets,
    By brave Gerona's deathful story,
  That, while _one_ Spaniard's life-blood beats,
    That blood shall stain the conqueror's glory.






SPANISH AIR.--"YA DESPERTO."

  But ah! if vain the patriot's zeal,
If neither valor's force nor wisdom's light
Can break or melt that blood-cemented seal
Which shuts so close the books of Europe's right--
  What song shall then in sadness tell
    Of broken pride, of prospects shaded,
  Of buried hopes, remembered well
    Of ardor quenched, and honor faded?
  What muse shall mourn the breathless brave,
    In sweetest dirge at Memory's shrine?
  What harp shall sigh o'er Freedom's grave?
    Oh Erin, Thine!








SET OF GLEES,

MUSIC BY MOORE.






THE MEETING OF THE SHIPS.


When o'er the silent seas alone,
For days and nights we've cheerless gone,
Oh they who've felt it know how sweet,
Some sunny morn a sail to meet.

Sparkling at once is every eye,
"Ship ahoy!" our joyful cry;
While answering back the sounds we hear,
"Ship ahoy!" what cheer? what...cheer?


Then sails are backed, we nearer come,
Kind words are said of friends and home;
And soon, too soon, we part with pain,
To sail o'er silent seas again.






HIP, HIP, HURRA!


Come, fill round a bumper, fill up to the brim,
He who shrinks from a bumper I pledge not to him;
Here's the girl that each loves, be her eye of what hue,
Or lustre, it may, so her heart is but true.
    Charge! (drinks) hip, hip, hurra, hurra!

Come charge high, again, boy, nor let the full wine
Leave a space in the brimmer, where daylight may shine;
Here's "the friends of our youth--tho' of some we're bereft,
May the links that are lost but endear what are left!"
    Charge! (drinks) hip, hip, hurra, hurra!

Once more fill a bumper--ne'er talk of the hour;
On hearts thus united old Time has no power.
May our lives, tho', alas! like the wine of to-night,
They must soon have an end, to the last flow as bright.
    Charge! (drinks) hip, hip, hurra, hurra!

Quick, quick, now, I'll give you, since Time's glass will run
Even faster than ours doth, three bumpers in one;
Here's the poet who sings--here's the warrior who fights--
Here's the, statesman who speaks, in the cause of men's rights!
    Charge! (drinks) hip, hip, hurra, hurra!

Come, once more, a bumper!--then drink as you please,
Tho', _who_ could fill half-way to toast such as these?
Here's our next joyous meeting--and oh when we meet,
May our wine be as bright and our union as sweet!
    Charge! (drinks) hip, hip, hurra, hurra!






HUSH, HUSH!


"Hush, hush!"--how well
That sweet word sounds,
When Love, the little sentinel,
  Walks his night-rounds;
Then, if a foot but dare
  One rose-leaf crush,
Myriads of voices in the air
  Whisper, "Hush, hush!"

"Hark, hark, 'tis he!"
  The night elves cry,
And hush their fairy harmony,
  While he steals by;
But if his silvery feet
  One dew-drop brush,
Voices are heard in chorus sweet,
  Whispering, "Hush, hush!"






THE PARTING BEFORE THE BATTLE.


HE.

On to the field, our doom is sealed,
  To conquer or be slaves:
This sun shall see our nation free,
  Or set upon our graves.

SHE.

Farewell, oh farewell, my love,
  May heaven thy guardian be,
And send bright angels from above
  To bring thee back to me.

HE.

On to the field, the battle-field,
  Where freedom's standard waves,
This sun shall see our tyrant yield,
  Or shine upon our graves.






THE WATCHMAN.

A TRIO.


WATCHMAN.

Past twelve o'clock--past twelve.

Good night, good night, my dearest--
  How fast the moments fly!
'Tis time to part, thou hearest
That hateful watchman's cry.

WATCHMAN.

Past one o'clock--past one.

Yet stay a moment longer--
  Alas! why is it so,
The wish to stay grows stronger,
  The more 'tis time to go?

WATCHMAN.

Past two o'clock--past two.

Now wrap thy cloak about thee--
  The hours must sure go wrong,
For when they're past without thee,
  They're, oh, ten times as long.

WATCHMAN.

Past three o'clock--past three.

Again that dreadful warning!
  Had ever time such flight?
And see the sky, 'tis morning--
  So now, _indeed_, good night.

WATCHMAN.

Past three o'clock--past three.

Goodnight, good night.






SAY, WHAT SHALL WE DANCE?


  Say, what shall we dance?
Shall we bound along the moonlight plain,
To music of Italy, Greece, or Spain?
  Say, what shall we dance?
Shall we, like those who rove
Thro' bright Grenada's grove,
To the light Bolero's measures move?
Or choose the Guaracia's languishing lay,
And thus to its sound die away?

  Strike the gay chords,
Let us hear each strain from every shore
That music haunts, or young feet wander o'er.
Hark! 'tis the light march, to whose measured time,
The Polish lady, by her lover led,
Delights thro' gay saloons with step untried to tread,
Or sweeter still, thro' moonlight walks
Whose shadows serve to hide
The blush that's raised by who talks
Of love the while by her side,
Then comes the smooth waltz, to whose floating sound
Like dreams we go gliding around,
Say, which shall we dance? which shall we dance?






THE EVENING GUN.


Remember'st thou that setting sun,
  The last I saw with thee,
When loud we heard the evening gun
Peal o'er the twilight sea?
Boom!--the sounds appeared to sweep
  Far o'er the verge of day,

Till, into realms beyond the deep,
  They seemed to die away.
Oft, when the toils of day are done,
  In pensive dreams of thee,
I sit to hear that evening gun,
  Peal o'er the stormy sea.
Boom!--and while, o'er billows curled.
  The distant sounds decay,
I weep and wish, from this rough world
  Like them to die away.








LEGENDARY BALLADS.




TO

THE MISS FEILDINGS,

THIS VOLUME

IS INSCRIBED

BY

THEIR FAITHFUL FRIEND AND SERVANT,

THOMAS MOORE.






LEGENDARY BALLADS






THE VOICE.


It came o'er her sleep, like a voice of those days,
When love, only love was the light of her ways;
And, soft as in moments of bliss long ago,
It whispered her name from the garden below.

"Alas," sighed the maiden, "how fancy can cheat!
"The world once had lips that could whisper thus sweet;
"But cold now they slumber in yon fatal deep.
"Where, oh that beside them this heart too could sleep!"

She sunk on her pillow--but no, 'twas in vain
To chase the illusion, that Voice came again!
She flew to the casement--but, husht as the grave,
In moonlight lay slumbering woodland and wave.

"Oh sleep, come and shield me," in anguish she said,
"From that call of the buried, that cry of the Dead!"
And sleep came around her--but, starting, she woke,
For still from the garden that spirit Voice spoke!

"I come," she exclaimed, "be thy home where it may,
"On earth or in Heaven, that call I obey;"
Then forth thro' the moonlight, with heart beating fast
And loud as a death-watch, the pale maiden past.

Still round her the scene all in loneliness shone;
And still, in the distance, that Voice led her on;
But whither she wandered, by wave or by shore,
None ever could tell, for she came back no more.

No, ne'er came she back,--but the watchman who stood,
That night, in the tower which o'ershadows the flood,
Saw dimly, 'tis said, o'er the moonlighted spray,
A youth on a steed bear the maiden away.






CUPID AND PSYCHE.


They told her that he, to whose vows she had listened
  Thro' night's fleeting hours, was a spirit unblest;--
Unholy the eyes, that beside her had glistened,
  And evil the lips she in darkness had prest.

"When next in thy chamber the  bridegroom reclineth,
  "Bring near him thy lamp, when in slumber he lies;
"And there, as the light, o'er his dark features shineth,
  "Thou'lt see what a demon hath won all thy sighs!"

Too fond to believe them, yet doubting, yet fearing,
  When calm lay the sleeper she stole with her light;
And saw--such a vision!--no image, appearing
  To bards in their day-dreams, was ever so bright.

A youth, but just passing from childhood's sweet morning,
  While round him still lingered its innocent ray;
Tho' gleams, from beneath his shut eyelids gave warning
  Of summer-noon lightnings that under them lay.

His brow had a grace more than mortal around it,
  While, glossy as gold from a fairy-land mine,
His sunny hair hung, and the flowers that crowned it
  Seemed fresh from the breeze of some garden divine.

Entranced stood the bride, on that miracle gazing,
  What late was but love is idolatry now;
But, ah--in her tremor the fatal lamp raising--
  A sparkle flew from it and dropt on his brow.

All's lost--with a start from his rosy sleep waking;
  The Spirit flashed o'er her his glances of fire;
Then, slow from the clasp of her snowy arms breaking,
  Thus said, in a voice more of sorrow than ire:

"Farewell--what a dream thy suspicion hath broken!
  "Thus ever. Affection's fond vision is crost;
"Dissolved are her spells when a doubt is but spoken,
  "And love, once distrusted, for ever is lost!"






HERO AND LEANDER.


"The night wind is moaning with mournful sigh,
"There gleameth no moon in the misty sky
  "No star over Helle's sea;
"Yet, yet, there is shining one holy light,
"One love-kindled star thro' the deep of night,
  "To lead me, sweet Hero, to thee!"

Thus saying, he plunged in the foamy stream,
Still fixing his gaze on that distant beam
  No eye but a lover's could see;
And still, as the surge swept over his head,
"To night," he said tenderly, "living or dead,
  "Sweet Hero, I'll rest with thee!"

But fiercer around him, the wild waves speed;
Oh, Love! in that hour of thy votary's need,
  Where, where could thy Spirit be?
He struggles--he sinks--while the hurricane's breath
Bears rudely away his last farewell in death--
  "Sweet Hero, I die for thee!"






THE LEAF AND THE FOUNTAIN.


"Tell me, kind Seer, I pray thee,
"So may the stars obey thee
  "So may each airy
  "Moon-elf and fairy
"Nightly their homage pay thee!
"Say, by what spell, above, below,
"In stars that wink or flowers that blow,
  "I may discover,
  "Ere night is over,
"Whether my love loves me, or no,
"Whether my love loves me."

"Maiden, the dark tree nigh thee
"Hath charms no gold could buy thee;
  "Its stem enchanted.
  "By moon-elves planted,
"Will all thou seek'st supply thee.
"Climb to yon boughs that highest grow,
"Bring thence their fairest leaf below;
  "And thou'lt discover,
  "Ere night is over,
"Whether thy love loves thee or no,
"Whether thy love loves thee."

"See, up the dark tree going,
"With blossoms round me blowing,
  "From thence, oh Father,
  "This leaf I gather,
"Fairest that there is growing.
"Say, by what sign I now shall know
"If in this leaf lie bliss or woe
  "And thus discover
  "Ere night is over,
"Whether my love loves me or no,
"Whether my love loves me."

"Fly to yon fount that's welling
"Where moonbeam ne'er had dwelling,
  "Dip in its water
  "That leaf, oh Daughter,
"And mark the tale 'tis telling;[1]
"Watch thou if pale or bright it glow,
"List thou, the while, that fountain's flow,
  "And thou'lt discover
  "Whether thy lover,
"Loved as he is, loves thee or no,
"Loved as he is, loves thee."

Forth flew the nymph, delighted,
To seek that fount benighted;
  But, scarce a minute
  The leaf lay in it,
When, lo, its bloom was blighted!
And as she asked, with voice of woe--
Listening, the while, that fountain's flow--
  "Shall I recover
  "My truant lover?"
The fountain seemed to answer, "No;"
The fountain answered, "No."


[1] The ancients had a mode of divination somewhat similar to this; and we
find the Emperor Adrian, when he went to consult the Fountain of Castalia,
plucking a bay leaf, and dipping it into the sacred water.






CEPHALUS AND PROCRIS.


A hunter once in that grove reclined,
  To shun the noon's bright eye,
And oft he wooed the wandering wind,
  To cool his brow with its sigh,
While mute lay even the wild bee's hum,
  Nor breath could stir the aspen's hair,
His song was still "Sweet air, oh come?"
  While Echo answered, "Come, sweet Air!"

But, hark, what sounds from the thicket rise!
  What meaneth that rustling spray?
"'Tis the white-horned doe," the Hunter cries,
  "I have sought since break of day."
Quick o'er the sunny glade he springs,
  The arrow flies from his sounding bow,
"Hilliho-hilliho!" he gayly sings,
  While Echo sighs forth "Hilliho!"

Alas, 'twas not the white-horned doe
  He saw in the rustling grove,
But the bridal veil, as pure as snow,
  Of his own young wedded love.
And, ah, too sure that arrow sped,
  For pale at his feet he sees her lie;--
"I die, I die," was all she said,
  While Echo murmured. "I die, I die!"






YOUTH AND AGE.


"Tell me, what's Love?" said Youth, one day,
To drooping Age, who crest his way.--
"It is a sunny hour of play,
"For which repentance dear doth pay;
  "Repentance! Repentance!
"And this is Love, as wise men say."
"Tell me, what's Love?" said Youth once more,
Fearful, yet fond, of Age's lore.--
"Soft as a passing summer's wind,
"Wouldst know the blight it leaves behind?
  "Repentance! Repentance!
"And this is Love--when love is o'er."

"Tell me, what's Love? "said Youth again,
Trusting the bliss, but not the pain.
"Sweet as a May tree's scented air--
"Mark ye what bitter fruit 'twill bear,
  "Repentance! Repentance!
"This, this is Love--sweet Youth, beware."

Just then, young Love himself came by,
And cast on Youth a smiling eye;
Who could resist that glance's ray?
In vain did Age his warning say,
  "Repentance! Repentance!"
Youth laughing went with Love away.






THE DYING WARRIOR.


A wounded Chieftain, lying
  By the Danube's leafy side,
Thus faintly said, in dying,
  "Oh! bear, thou foaming tide.
  "This gift to my lady-bride."

'Twas then, in life's last quiver,
  He flung the scarf he wore
Into the foaming river,
  Which, ah too quickly, bore
  That pledge of one no more!

With fond impatience burning,
  The Chieftain's lady stood,
To watch her love returning
  In triumph down the flood,
  From that day's field of blood.

But, field, alas, ill-fated!
  The lady saw, instead
Of the bark whose speed she waited,
  Her hero's scarf, all red
With the drops his heart had shed.

One shriek--and all was over--
  Her life-pulse ceased to beat;
The gloomy waves now cover
  That bridal-flower so sweet.
  And the scarf is her winding sheet!






THE MAGIC MIRROR.


"Come, if thy magic Glass have power
  "To call up forms we sigh to see;
"Show me my, love, in that, rosy bower,
  "Where last she pledged her truth to me."

The Wizard showed him his Lady bright,
  Where lone and pale in her bower she lay;
"True-hearted maid," said the happy Knight,
  "She's thinking of one, who is far away."

But, lo! a page, with looks of joy,
  Brings tidings to the Lady's ear;
"'Tis," said the Knight, "the same bright boy,
  "Who used to guide me to my dear."
The Lady now, from her favorite tree,
  Hath, smiling, plucked a rosy flower:
"Such," he exclaimed, "was the gift that she
  "Each morning sent me from that bower!"

She gives her page the blooming rose,
  With looks that say, "Like lightning, fly!"
"Thus," thought the Knight, "she soothes her woes,
  "By fancying, still, her true-love nigh."
But the page returns, and--oh, what a sight,
  For trusting lover's eyes to see!--
Leads to that bower another Knight,
  As young and, alas, as loved as he!

"Such," quoth the Youth, "is Woman's love!"
  Then, darting forth, with furious bound,
Dashed at the Mirror his iron glove,
  And strewed it all in fragments round.

MORAL.

Such ills would never have come to pass,
  Had he ne'er sought that fatal view;
The Wizard would still have kept his Glass,
  And the Knight still thought his Lady true.






THE PILGRIM.


Still thus, when twilight gleamed,
Far off his Castle seemed,
  Traced on the sky;
And still, as fancy bore him.
To those dim towers before him,
He gazed, with wishful eye;
  And thought his home was nigh.

"Hall of my Sires!" he said,
"How long, with weary tread,
  "Must I toil on?
"Each eve, as thus I wander,
"Thy towers seem rising yonder,
"But, scarce hath daylight shone,
  "When, like a dream, thou'rt gone!"

So went the Pilgrim still,
Down dale and over hill,
  Day after day;
That glimpse of home, so cheering,
At twilight still appearing,
But still, with morning's ray,
  Melting, like mist, away!

Where rests the Pilgrim now?
Here, by this cypress bough,
  Closed his career;
That dream, of fancy's weaving,
No more his steps deceiving,
Alike past hope and fear,
  The Pilgrim's home is here.






THE HIGH-BORN LADYE.


In vain all the Knights to the Underwald wooed her,
  Tho' brightest of maidens, the proudest was she;
Brave chieftains they sought, and young minstrels they sued her,
  But worthy were none of the high-born Ladye.

"Whosoever I wed," said this maid, so excelling,
  "That Knight must the conqueror of conquerors be;
"He must place me in halls fit for monarchs to dwell in:--
  "None else shall be Lord of the high-born Ladye!

Thus spoke the proud damsel, with scorn looking round her
  On Knights and on Nobles of highest degree;
Who humbly and hopelessly left as they found her,
  And worshipt at distance the high-born Ladye.

At length came a Knight, from a far land to woo her,
  With plumes on his helm like the foam of the sea;
His visor was down--but, with voice that thrilled thro her,
  He whispered his vows to the high-born Ladye.

"Proud maiden! I come with high spousals to grace thee,
  "In me the great conqueror of conquerors see;
"Enthroned in a hall fit for monarchs I'll place thee,
  "And mine, thou'rt for ever, thou high-born Ladye!"

The maiden she smiled, and in jewels arrayed her,
  Of thrones and tiaras already dreamt she;
And proud was the step, as her bridegroom conveyed her
  In pomp to his home, of that highborn Ladye.

"But whither," she, starting, exclaims, "have you, led me?
  "Here's naught but a tomb and a dark cypress tree;
"Is _this_ the bright palace in which thou wouldst wed me?"
  With scorn in her glance said the high-born Ladye.

"Tis the home," he replied, "of earth's loftiest creatures"--
  Then lifted his helm for the fair one to see;
But she sunk on the ground--'twas a skeleton's features
  And Death was the Lord of the high-born Ladye!






THE INDIAN BOAT.


    'Twas midnight dark,
    The seaman's bark,
Swift o'er the waters bore him,
    When, thro' the night,
    He spied a light
Shoot o'er the wave before him.
"A sail! a sail!" he cries;
  "She comes from the Indian shore
"And to-night shall be our prize,
  "With her freight of golden ore;
    "Sail on! sail on!"
    When morning shone
He saw the gold still clearer;
    But, though so fast
    The waves he past
That boat seemed never the nearer.

    Bright daylight came,
    And still the same
Rich bark before him floated;
    While on the prize
    His wishful eyes
Like any young lover's doted:
"More sail! more sail!" he cries,
  While the waves overtop the mast;
And his bounding galley flies,
  Like an arrow before the blast.
    Thus on, and on,
    Till day was gone,
And the moon thro' heaven did hie her,
    He swept the main,
    But all in vain,
That boat seemed never the nigher.

    And many a day
    To night gave way,
And many a morn succeeded:
    While still his flight,
    Thro day and night,
That restless mariner speeded.
Who knows--who knows what seas
  He is now careering o'er?
Behind, the eternal breeze,
  And that mocking bark, before!
    For, oh, till sky
    And earth shall die,
And their death leave none to rue it,
    That boat must flee
    O'er the boundless sea,
And that ship in vain pursue it.






THE STRANGER.


Come list, while I tell of the heart-wounded Stranger
  Who sleeps her last slumber in this haunted ground;
Where often, at midnight, the lonely wood-ranger
  Hears soft fairy music re-echo around.

None e'er knew the name of that heart-stricken lady,
  Her language, tho' sweet, none could e'er understand;
But her features so sunned, and her eyelash so shady,
  Bespoke her a child of some far Eastern land.

'Twas one summer night, when the village lay sleeping,
  A soft strain of melody came o'er our ears;
So sweet, but so mournful, half song and half weeping,
  Like music that Sorrow had steeped in her tears.

We thought 'twas an anthem some angel had sung us;--
  But, soon as the day-beams had gushed from on high,
With wonder we saw this bright stranger among us,
  All lovely and lone, as if strayed from the sky.

Nor long did her life for this sphere seem intended,
  For pale was her cheek, with that spirit-like hue,
Which comes when the day of this world is nigh ended,
  And light from another already shines through.

Then her eyes, when she sung--oh, but once to have seen them--
  Left thoughts in the soul that can never depart;
While her looks and her voice made a language between them,
  That spoke more than holiest words to the heart.

But she past like a day-dream, no skill could restore her--
  Whate'er was her sorrow, its ruin came fast;
She died with the same spell of mystery o'er her.
  That song of past days on her lips to the last.

Not even in the grave is her sad heart reposing--
  Still hovers the spirit of grief round her tomb;
For oft, when the shadows of midnight are closing,
  The same strain of music is heard thro' the gloom.








BALLADS, SONGS, ETC.






TO-DAY, DEAREST! IS OURS.


To-day, dearest! is ours;
  Why should Love carelessly lose it?
This life shines or lowers
  Just as we, weak mortals, use it.
'Tis time enough, when its flowers decay,
  To think of the thorns of Sorrow
And Joy, if left on the stem to-day,
  May wither before to-morrow.

Then why, dearest! so long
  Let the sweet moments fly over?
Tho' now, blooming and young
  Thou hast me devoutly thy lover;
Yet Time from both, in his silent lapse,
  Some treasure may steal or borrow;
Thy charms may be less in bloom, perhaps,
  Or I less in love to-morrow.






WHEN ON THE LIP THE SIGH DELAYS.


When on the lip the sigh delays,
  As if 'twould linger there for ever;
When eyes would give the world to gaze,
  Yet still look down and venture never;
When, tho' with fairest nymphs we rove,
  There's one we dream of more than any--
If all this is not real love,
  'Tis something wondrous like it, Fanny!

To think and ponder, when apart,
  On all we've got to say at meeting;
And yet when near, with heart to heart,
  Sit mute and listen to their beating:
To see but one bright object move,
  The only moon, where stars are many--
If all this is not downright love,
  I prithee say what _is_, my Fanny!

When Hope foretells the brightest, best,
  Tho' Reason on the darkest reckons;
When Passion drives us to the west,
  Tho' Prudence to the eastward beckons;
When all turns round, below, above,
  And our own heads the most of any--
If this is not stark, staring love,
  Then you and I are sages, Fanny.






HERE, TAKE MY HEART.


Here, take my heart--'twill be safe in thy keeping,
  While I go wandering o'er land and o'er sea;
Smiling or sorrowing, waking or sleeping,
  What need I care, so my heart is with thee?

If in the race we are destined to run, love,
  They who have light hearts the happiest be,
Then happier still must be they who have none, love.
  And that will be _my_ case when mine is with thee.

It matters not where I may now be a rover,
  I care not how many bright eyes I may see;
Should Venus herself come and ask me to love her,
  I'd tell her I couldn't--my heart is with thee.

And there let it lie, growing fonder and, fonder--
  For, even should Fortune turn truant to me,
Why, let her go--I've a treasure beyond her,
  As long as my heart's out at interest With thee!






OH, CALL IT BY SOME BETTER NAME.


Oh, call it by some better name,
  For Friendship sounds too cold,
While Love is now a worldly flame,
  Whose shrine must be of gold:
And Passion, like the sun at noon,
  That burns o'er all he sees,
Awhile as warm will set as soon--
  Then call it none of these.

Imagine something purer far,
  More free from stain of clay
Than Friendship, Love, or Passion are,
  Yet human, still as they:
And if thy lip, for love like this,
  No mortal word can frame,
Go, ask of angels what it is,
  And call it by that name!






POOR WOUNDED HEART


  Poor wounded heart, farewell!
    Thy hour of rest is come;
    Thou soon wilt reach thy home,
  Poor wounded heart, farewell!
The pain thou'lt feel in breaking
  Less bitter far will be,
Than that long, deadly aching,
  This life has been to thee.

  There--broken heart, farewell!
    The pang is o'er--
    The parting pang is o'er;
    Thou now wilt bleed no more.
  Poor broken heart, farewell!
No rest for thee but dying--
  Like waves whose strife is past,
On death's cold shore thus lying,
  Thou sleepst in peace at last--
    Poor broken heart, farewell!






THE EAST INDIAN.


Come, May, with all thy flowers,
  Thy sweetly-scented thorn,
Thy cooling evening showers,
  The fragrant breath at morn:
When, May-flies haunt the willow,
  When May-buds tempt the bee,
Then o'er the shining billow
  My love will come to me.

From Eastern Isles she's winging
  Thro' watery wilds her way,
And on her cheek is bringing
  The bright sun's orient ray:
Oh, come and court her hither,
  Ye breezes mild and warm--
One winter's gale would wither
  So soft, so pure a form.

The fields where she was straying
  Are blest with endless light,
With zephyrs always playing
  Thro' gardens always bright.
Then now, sweet May! be sweeter
  Than e'er, thou'st been before;
Let sighs from roses meet her
  When she comes near our shore.






POOR BROKEN FLOWER.


Poor broken flower! what art can now recover thee?
  Torn from the stem that fed thy rosy breath--
    In vain the sunbeams seek
    To warm that faded cheek;
The dews of heaven, that once like balm fell over thee;
  Now are but tears, to weep thy early death.

So droops the maid whose lover hath forsaken her,--
  Thrown from his arms, as lone and lost as thou;
    In vain the smiles of all
    Like sunbeams round her fall:
The only smile that could from death awaken her,
  That smile, alas! is gone to others now.






THE PRETTY ROSE-TREE.


      Being weary of love,
      I flew to the grove,
And chose me a tree of the fairest;
      Saying, "Pretty Rose-tree,
      "Thou my mistress shall be,
  "And I'll worship each bud thou bearest.
    "For the hearts of this world are hollow,
    "And fickle the smiles we follow;
        "And 'tis sweet, when all
        "Their witcheries pall
"To have a pure love to fly to:
        "So, my pretty Rose-tree,
        "Thou my mistress shalt be,
"And the only one now I shall sigh to."

        When the beautiful hue
        Of thy cheek thro' the dew
Of morning is bashfully peeping,
        "Sweet tears," I shall say
        (As I brush them away),
  "At least there's no art in this weeping"
  Altho thou shouldst die to-morrow;
  'Twill not be from pain or sorrow;
        And the thorns of thy stem
        Are not like them
With which men wound each other;
        So, my pretty Rose-tree,
        Thou my mistress shalt be
And I'll never again sigh to another.






SHINE OUT, STARS!


Shine out, Stars! let Heaven assemble
  Round us every festal ray,
Lights that move not, lights that tremble,
  All to grace this Eve of May.
Let the flower-beds all lie waking,
  And the odors shut up there,
From their downy prisons breaking,
  Fly abroad thro sea and air.

And Would Love, too, bring his sweetness,
  With our other joys to weave,
Oh what glory, what completeness,
  Then would crown this bright May Eve!
Shine out, Stars! let night assemble
  Round us every festal ray,
Lights that move not, lights that tremble,
  To adorn this Eve of May.






THE YOUNG MULETEERS OF GRENADA.

Oh, the joys of our evening posada,
  Where, resting, at close of day,
We, young Muleteers of Grenada,
  Sit and sing the sunshine away;
So merry, that even the slumbers
  That round us hung seem gone;
Till the lute's soft drowsy numbers
  Again beguile them on.
    Oh the joys, etc.

Then as each to his loved sultana
  In sleep still breathes the sigh,
The name of some black-eyed Tirana,
  Escapes our lips as we lie.
Till, with morning's rosy twinkle,
  Again we're up and gone--
While the mule-bell's drowsy tinkle
  Beguiles the rough way on.
Oh the joys of our merry posada,
  Where, resting at close of day,
We, young Muleteers of Grenada,
  Thus sing the gay moments away.






TELL HER, OH, TELL HER.


Tell her, oh, tell her, the lute she left lying
Beneath the green arbor is still lying there;
And breezes like lovers around it are sighing,
But not a soft whisper replies to their prayer.

Tell her, oh, tell her, the tree that, in going,
Beside the green arbor she playfully set,
As lovely as, ever is blushing and blowing,
And not a, bright leaflet has fallen from it yet.

So while away from that arbor forsaken,
The maiden is wandering, still let her be
As true as the lute that no sighing can waken
And blooming for ever, unchanged as the tree!






NIGHTS OF MUSIC.


Nights of music, nights of loving,
  Lost too soon, remembered long.
When we went by moonlight roving,
  Hearts all love and lips all song.
When this faithful lute recorded
  All my spirit felt to thee;
And that smile the song rewarded--
  Worth Whole years of fame to me!

Nights of song, and nights of splendor,
Filled with joys too sweet to last--
Joys that, like the star-light, tender,
While they shore no shadow cast.
Tho' all other happy hours
   From my fading memory fly,
Of, that starlight, of those bowers,
   Not a beam, a leaf may die!






OUR FIRST YOUNG LOVE.


Our first young love resembles
  That short but brilliant ray,
Which smiles and weeps and trembles
Thro' April's earliest day.
And not all life before us,
  Howe'er its lights may play,
Can shed a lustre o'er us
  Like that first April ray.

Our summer sun may squander
A blaze serener, grander;
      Our autumn beam
      May, like a dream
  Of heaven, die calm away;
But no--let life before us
  Bring all the light it may,
'Twill ne'er shed lustre o'er us
  Like that first youthful ray.






BLACK AND BLUE EYES.


     The brilliant black eye
     May in triumph let fly
All its darts without Caring who feels 'em;
     But the soft eye of blue,
     Tho' it scatter wounds too,
Is much better pleased when it heals 'em--
     Dear Fanny!
Is much better pleased when it heals 'em.

     The black eye may say,
     "Come and worship my ray--
"By adoring, perhaps you may move me!"
     But the blue eye, half hid,
     Says from under its lid,
"I love and am yours, if you love me!"
     Yes, Fanny!
     The blue eye, half hid,
     Says, from under its lid,
"I love and am yours, if you love me!"

     Come tell me, then, why
     In that lovely blue eye
Not a charm of its tint I discover;
     Oh why should you wear
     The only blue pair
That ever said "No" to a lover?
    Dear Fanny!
    Oh, why should you wear
    The only blue pair
That ever said "No" to a lover?






DEAR FANNY.


"She has beauty, but still you must keep your heart cool;
  "She has wit, but you mustn't be caught, so;"
Thus Reason advises, but Reason's a fool,
  And 'tis not the first time I have thought so,
    Dear Fanny.
  'Tis not the first time I have thought so.

"She is lovely; then love her, nor let the bliss fly;
  "'Tis the charm of youth's vanishing season;"
Thus Love has advised me and who will deny
  That Love reasons much better than Reason,
    Dear Fanny?
  Love reasons much better than Reason.






FROM LIFE WITHOUT FREEDOM.


From life without freedom, say, who would not fly?
For one day of freedom, oh! who would not die?
Hark!--hark! 'tis the trumpet! the call of the brave,
The death-song of tyrants, the dirge of the slave.
Our country lies bleeding--haste, haste to her aid;
One arm that defends is worth hosts that invade.

In death's kindly bosom our last hope remains--
The dead fear no tyrants, the grave has no chains.
On, on to the combat! the heroes that bleed
For virtue and mankind are heroes indeed.
And oh, even if Freedom from _this_ world be driven,
Despair not--at least we shall find her in heaven.






HERE'S THE BOWER.


Here's the bower she loved so much,
  And the tree she planted;
Here's the harp she used to touch--
  Oh, how that touch enchanted!
Roses now unheeded sigh;
  Where's the hand to wreathe them?
Songs around neglected lie;
  Where's the lip to breathe them?
        Here's the bower, etc.

Spring may bloom, but she we loved
  Ne'er shall feel its sweetness;
Time, that once so fleetly moved,
  Now hath lost its fleetness.
Years were days, when here she strayed,
  Days were moments near her;
Heaven ne'er formed a brighter maid,
  Nor Pity wept a dearer!
        Here's the bower, etc.






I SAW THE MOON RISE CLEAR.

A FINLAND LOVE SONG.


I saw the moon rise clear
  O'er hills and vales of snow
Nor told my fleet reindeer
  The track I wished to go.
Yet quick he bounded forth;
  For well my reindeer knew
I've but one path on earth--
  The path which leads to you.

The gloom that winter cast,
  How soon the heart forgets,
When summer brings, at last,
  Her sun that never sets!
So dawned my love for you;
  So, fixt thro' joy and pain,
Than summer sun more true,
  'Twill never set again.






LOVE AND THE SUN-DIAL.


Young Love found a Dial once in a dark shade
Where man ne'er had wandered nor sunbeam played;
"Why thus in darkness lie?" whispered young Love,
"Thou, whose gay hours in sunshine should move."
"I ne'er," said the Dial, "have seen the warm sun,
"So noonday and midnight to me, Love, are one."

Then Love took the Dial away from the shade,
And placed her where Heaven's beam warmly played.
There she reclined, beneath Love's gazing eye,
While, marked all with sunshine, her hours flew by.
"Oh, how," said the Dial, "can any fair maid
"That's born to be shone upon rest in the shade?"

But night now comes on and the sunbeam's o'er,
And Love stops to gaze on the Dial no more.
Alone and neglected, while bleak rain and winds
Are storming around her, with sorrow she finds
That Love had but numbered a few sunny hours,--
Then left the remainder to darkness and showers!






LOVE AND TIME.


'Tis said--but whether true or not
  Let bards declare who've seen 'em--
That Love and Time have only got
  One pair of wings between 'em.
In Courtship's first delicious hour,
  The boy full oft can spare 'em;
So, loitering in his lady's bower,
  He lets the gray-beard wear 'em.
    Then is Time's hour of play;
    Oh, how be flies, flies away!

But short the moments, short as bright,
  When he the wings can borrow;
If Time to-day has had his flight,
  Love takes his turn to-morrow.
Ah! Time and Love, your change is then
  The saddest and most trying,
When one begins to limp again,
  And t'other takes to flying.
    Then is Love's hour to stray;
    Oh, how he flies, flies away!

But there's a nymph, whose chains I feel,
  And bless the silken fetter,
Who knows, the dear one, how to deal
  With Love and Time much better.
So well she checks their wanderings,
  So peacefully she pairs 'em,
That Love with her ne'er thinks of wings,
  And Time for ever wears 'em.
    This is Time's holiday;
    Oh, how he flies, flies away!






LOVE'S LIGHT SUMMER-CLOUD.


Pain and sorrow shall vanish before us--
  Youth may wither, but feeling will last;
All the shadow that e'er shall fall o'er us
  Love's light summer-cloud only shall cast.
    Oh, if to love thee more
    Each hour I number o'er--
    If this a passion be
    Worthy of thee,
Then be happy, for thus I adore thee.
  Charms may wither, but feeling shall last:
All the shadow that e'er shall fall o'er thee,
  Love's light summer-cloud sweetly shall cast.
Rest, dear bosom, no sorrows shall pain thee,
  Sighs of pleasure alone shalt thou steal;
Beam, bright eyelid, no weeping shall stain thee,
  Tears of rapture alone shalt thou feel.
      Oh, if there be a charm,
      In love, to banish harm--
      If pleasure's truest spell
        Be to love well,
Then be happy, for thus I adore thee,
  Charms may wither, but feeling shall last;
All the shadow that e'er shall fall o'er thee.
  Love's light summer-cloud sweetly shall cast.






LOVE, WANDERING THRO' THE GOLDEN MAZE.


Love, wandering through the golden maze
  Of my beloved's hair,
Traced every lock with fond delays,
  And, doting, lingered there.
And soon he found 'twere vain to fly;
  His heart was close confined,
For, every ringlet was a tie--
  A chain by beauty twined.






MERRILY EVERY BOSOM BOUNDETH.

(THE TYROLESE SONG OF LIBERTY.)


Merrily every bosom boundeth,
      Merrily, oh!
Where the song of Freedom soundeth,
      Merrily oh!
  There the warrior's arms
    Shed more splendor;
  There the maiden's charm's
    Shine more tender;
Every joy the land surroundeth,
  Merrily, oh! merrily, oh!

Wearily every bosom pineth,
      Wearily, oh!
Where the bond of slavery twineth
      Wearily, oh
  There the warrior's dart
    Hath no fleetness;
  There the maiden's heart
    Hath no sweetness--
Every flower of life declineth,
  Wearily, oh! wearily, oh!

Cheerily then from hill and valley,
      Cheerily, oh!
Like your native fountain sally,
      Cheerily, oh!
  If a glorious death,
    Won by bravery,
  Sweeter be than breath
    Sighed in slavery,
Round the flag of Freedom rally,
  Cheerily, oh! cheerily, oh!






REMEMBER THE TIME.

(THE CASTILIAN MAID.)


Remember the time, in La Mancha's shades,
  When our moments so blissfully flew;
When you called me the flower of Castilian maids,
  And I blushed to be called so by you;
When I taught you to warble the gay seguadille.
  And to dance to the light castanet;
Oh, never, dear youth, let you roam where you will,
  The delight of those moments forget.

They tell me, you lovers from Erin's green isle,
  Every hour a new passion can feel;
And that soon, in the light of some lovelier smile.
  You'll forget the poor maid of Castile.
But they know not how brave in battle you are,
  Or they never could think you would rove;
For 'tis always the spirit most gallant in war
  That is fondest and truest in Love.






OH, SOON RETURN.


Our white sail caught the evening ray,
  The wave beneath us seemed to burn,
When all the weeping maid could say,
  Was, "Oh, soon return!"
Thro' many a clime our ship was driven
O'er many a billow rudely thrown;
Now chilled beneath a northern heaven,
  Now sunned in summer's zone:
And still, where'er we bent our way,
  When evening bid the west wave burn,
I fancied still I heard her say,
  "Oh, soon return!"

If ever yet my bosom found
  Its thoughts one moment turned from thee,
'Twas when the combat raged around,
  And brave men looked to me.
But tho' the war-field's wild alarm
  For gentle love was all unmeet,
He lent to glory's brow the charm,
  Which made even danger sweet.
And still, when victory's calm came o'er
  The hearts where rage had ceased to burn,
Those parting words I heard once more,
  "Oh, soon return!--Oh, soon return!"






LOVE THEE?


Love thee?--so well, so tenderly
  Thou'rt loved, adored by me,
Fame, fortune, wealth, and liberty,
  Were worthless without thee.
Tho' brimmed with blessings, pure and rare,
  Life's cup before me lay,
Unless thy love were mingled there,
  I'd spurn the draft away.
Love thee?--so well, so tenderly,
  Thou'rt loved, adored by me,
Fame, fortune, wealth, and liberty,
  Are worthless without thee.

Without thy smile, the monarch's lot
  To me were dark and lone,
While, _with_ it, even the humblest cot
  Were brighter than his throne.
Those worlds for which the conqueror sighs
  For me would have no charms;
My only world thy gentle eyes--
  My throne thy circling arms!
Oh, yes, so well, so tenderly
  Thou'rt loved, adored by me,
Whole realms of light and liberty
  Were worthless without thee.






ONE DEAR SMILE.


Couldst thou look as dear as when
  First I sighed for thee;
Couldst thou make me feel again
Every wish I breathed thee then,
  Oh, how blissful life would be!
Hopes that now beguiling leave me,
  Joys that lie in slumber cold--
All would wake, couldst thou but give me
  One dear smile like those of old.

No--there's nothing left us now,
  But to mourn the past;
Vain was every ardent vow--
Never yet did Heaven allow
  Love so warm, so wild, to last.
Not even hope could now deceive me--
  Life itself looks dark and cold;
Oh, thou never more canst give me
  One dear smile like those of old






YES, YES, WHEN THE BLOOM.


Yes, yes, when, the bloom of Love's boyhood is o'er,
  He'll turn into friendship that feels no decay;
And, tho' Time may take from him the wings he once wore,
The charms that remain will be bright as before,
  And he'll lose but his young trick of flying away.
Then let it console thee, if Love should not stay,
  That Friendship our last happy moments will crown:
Like the shadows of morning, Love lessens away,
While Friendship, like those at the closing of day,
  Will linger and lengthen as life's sun goes down.






THE DAY OF LOVE.


  The beam of morning trembling
    Stole o'er the mountain brook,
  With timid ray resembling
    Affection's early look.
Thus love begins--sweet morn of love!

  The noon-tide ray ascended,
    And o'er the valley's stream
  Diffused a glow as splendid
    As passion's riper dream.
Thus love expands--warm noon of love!

  But evening came, o'ershading
    The glories of the sky,
  Like faith and fondness fading
    From passion's altered eye.
Thus love declines--cold eve of love!






LUSITANIAN WAR-SONG.


The song of war shall echo thro' our mountains,
  Till not one hateful link remains
  Of slavery's lingering chains;
  Till not one tyrant tread our plains,
Nor traitor lip pollute our fountains.
  No! never till that glorious day
  Shall Lusitania's sons be gay,
  Or hear, oh Peace, thy welcome lay
Resounding thro' her sunny mountains.

The song of war shall echo thro' our mountains,
  Till Victory's self shall, smiling, say,
  "Your cloud of foes hath past away,
  "And Freedom comes with new-born ray
"To gild your vines and light your fountains."
  Oh, never till that glorious day
  Shall Lusitania's sons be gay,
  Or hear, sweet Peace, thy welcome lay
Resounding thro' her sunny mountains.






THE YOUNG ROSE.


The young rose I give thee, so dewy and bright,
Was the floweret most dear to the sweet bird of night,
Who oft, by the moon, o'er her blushes hath hung,
And thrilled every leaf with the wild lay he sung.

Oh, take thou this young rose, and let her life be
Prolonged by the breath she will borrow from thee;
For, while o'er her bosom thy soft notes shall thrill,
She'll think the sweet night-bird is courting her still.






WHEN MIDST THE GAY I MEET.


When midst the gay I meet
  That gentle smile of thine,
Tho' still on me it turns most sweet,
  I scarce can call it mine:
But when to me alone
  Your secret tears you show,
Oh, then I feel those tears my own,
  And claim them while they flow.
Then still with bright looks bless
  The gay, the cold, the free;
Give smiles to those who love you less,
  But keep your tears for me.

The snow on Jura's steep
  Can smile in many a beam,
Yet still in chains of coldness sleep.
  How bright soe'er it seem.
But, when some deep-felt ray
  Whose touch is fire appears,
Oh, then the smile is warmed away,
  And, melting, turns to tears.
Then still with bright looks bless
  The gay, the cold, the free;
Give smiles to those who love you less,
  But keep your tears for me.






WHEN TWILIGHT DEWS.


When twilight dews are falling soft
  Upon the rosy sea, love,
I watch the star, whose beam so oft
  Has lighted me to thee, love.
And thou too, on that orb so dear,
  Dost often gaze at even,
And think, tho' lost for ever here,
  Thou'lt yet be mine in heaven.

There's not a garden walk I tread,
  There's not a flower I see, love,
But brings to mind some hope that's fled,
  Some joy that's gone with thee, Love.
And still I wish that hour was near,
  When, friends and foes forgiven,
The pains, the ills we've wept thro' here
  May turn to smiles in heaven.






YOUNG JESSICA.


Young Jessica sat all the day,
  With heart o'er idle love-thoughts pining;
Her needle bright beside her lay,
  So active once!--now idly shining.
Ah, Jessy, 'tis in idle hearts
  That love and mischief are most nimble;
The safest shield against the darts
  Of Cupid is Minerva's thimble.

The child who with a magnet plays
  Well knowing all its arts, so wily,
The tempter near a needle lays.
  And laughing says, "We'll steal it slily."
The needle, having naught to do,
  Is pleased to let the magnet wheedle;
Till closer, closer come the two,
  And--off, at length, elopes the needle.

Now, had this needle turned its eye
  To some gay reticule's construction,
It ne'er had strayed from duty's tie,
  Nor felt the magnet's sly seduction.
Thus, girls, would you keep quiet hearts,
  Your snowy fingers must be nimble;
The safest shield against the darts
  Of Cupid is Minerva's thimble.






HOW HAPPY, ONCE.


_How_ happy, once, tho' winged with sighs,
  My moments flew along,
While looking on those smiling eyes,
  And listening to thy magic song!
But vanished now, like summer dreams,
  Those moments smile no more;
For me that eye no longer beams,
  That song for me is o'er.
Mine the cold brow,
  That speaks thy altered vow,
While others feel thy sunshine now.

Oh, could I change my love like thee,
  One hope might yet be mine--
Some other eyes as bright to see,
  And hear a voice as sweet as thine:
But never, never can this heart
  Be waked to life again;
With thee it lost its vital part,
  And withered then!
Cold its pulse lies,
And mute are even its sighs,
All other grief it now defies.






I LOVE BUT THEE.


If, after all, you still will doubt and fear me,
  And think this heart to other loves will stray,
If I must swear, then, lovely doubter, hear me;
  By every dream I have when thou'rt away,
By every throb I feel when thou art near me,
  I love but thee--I love but thee!

By those dark eyes, where light is ever playing,
  Where Love in depth of shadow holds his throne,
And by those lips, which give whate'er thou'rt saying,
  Or grave or gay, a music of its own,
A music far beyond all minstrel's playing,
  I love but thee--I love but thee!

By that fair brow, where Innocence reposes,
  As pure as moonlight sleeping upon snow,
And by that cheek, whose fleeting blush discloses
  A hue too bright to bless this world below,
And only fit to dwell on Eden's roses,
  I love but thee--I love but thee!






LET JOY ALONE BE REMEMBERED NOW.


Let thy joys alone be remembered now,
  Let thy sorrows go sleep awhile;
Or if thought's dark cloud come o'er thy brow,
  Let Love light it up with his smile,
For thus to meet, and thus to find,
  That Time, whose touch can chill
Each flower of form, each grace of mind,
  Hath left thee blooming still,
Oh, joy alone should be thought of now,
  Let our sorrows go sleep awhile;
Or, should thought's dark cloud come o'er thy brow,
  Let Love light it up with his smile.

When the flowers of life's sweet garden fade,
  If but _one_ bright leaf remain,
Of the many that once its glory made,
  It is not for us to complain.
But thus to meet and thus to wake
  In all Love's early bliss;
Oh, Time all other gifts may take,
  So he but leaves us this!
Then let joy alone be remembered now,
  Let our sorrows go sleep awhile;
Or if thought's dark cloud come o'er the brow,
  Let Love light it up with his smile!






LOVE THEE, DEAREST? LOVE THEE?


Love thee, dearest? love thee?
  Yes, by yonder star I swear,
Which thro' tears above thee
  Shines so sadly fair;
Tho' often dim,
With tears, like him,
Like him my truth will shine,
  And--love thee, dearest? love thee?
Yes, till death I'm thine.

Leave thee, dearest? leave thee?
  No, that star is not more true;
When my vows deceive thee,
  _He_ will wander too.
A cloud of night
May veil his light,
And death shall darken mine--
  But--leave thee, dearest? leave thee?
No, till death I'm thine.






MY HEART AND LUTE.


I give thee all--I can no more--
  Tho' poor the offering be;
My heart and lute are all the store
  That I can bring to thee.
A lute whose gentle song reveals
  The soul of love full well;
And, better far, a heart that feels
  Much more than lute could tell.

Tho' love and song may fail, alas!
  To keep life's clouds away,
At least 'twill make them lighter pass,
  Or gild them if they stay.
And even if Care at moments flings
  A discord o'er life's happy strain,
Let Love but gently touch the strings,
  'Twill all be sweet again!






PEACE, PEACE TO HIM THAT'S GONE!


  When I am dead.
  Then lay my head
In some lone, distant dell,
  Where voices ne'er
  Shall stir the air,
Or break its silent spell.

  If any sound
  Be heard around,
Let the sweet bird alone,
  That weeps in song,
  Sing all night long,
"Peace, peace, to him that's gone!"

  Yet, oh, were mine
  One sigh of thine,
One pitying word from thee,
  Like gleams of heaven,
  To sinners given,
Would be that word to me.

  Howe'er unblest,
  My shade would rest
While listening to that tone;--
  Enough 'twould be
  To hear from thee,
"Peace, peace, to him that gone."






ROSE OF THE DESERT


Rose of the Desert! thou, whose blushing ray,
Lonely and lovely, fleets unseen away;
No hand to cull thee, none to woo thy sigh,--
In vestal silence left to live and die.--
Rose of the Desert! thus should woman be,
Shining uncourted, lone and safe, like thee.

Rose of the Garden, how, unlike thy doom!
Destined for others, not thyself, to bloom;
Culled ere thy beauty lives thro' half its day;
A moment cherished, and then cast away;
Rose of the Garden! such is woman's lot,--
Worshipt while blooming--when she fades, forgot.






'TIS ALL FOR THEE.


If life for me hath joy or light,
    'Tis all from thee,
My thoughts by day, my dreams by night,
    Are but of thee, of only thee.
Whate'er of hope or peace I know,
My zest in joy, my balm in woe,
To those dear eyes of thine I owe,
    'Tis all from thee.

My heart, even ere I saw those eyes,
    Seemed doomed to thee;
Kept pure till then from other ties,
    'Twas all for thee, for only thee.
Like plants that sleep till sunny May
Calls forth their life my spirit lay,
Till, touched by Love's awakening ray,
    It lived for thee, it lived for thee.

When Fame would call me to her heights,
    She speaks by thee;
And dim would shine her proudest lights,
    Unshared by thee, unshared by thee.
Whene'er I seek the Muse's shrine,
Where Bards have hung their wreaths divine,
And wish those wreaths of glory mine,
  'Tis all for thee, for only thee.






THE SONG OF THE OLDEN TIME.


There's a song of the olden time,
  Falling sad o'er the ear,
Like the dream of some village chime,
  Which in youth we loved to hear.
And even amidst the grand and gay,
  When Music tries her gentlest art
I never hear so sweet a lay,
  Or one that hangs so round my heart,
As that song of the olden time,
  Falling sad o'er the ear,
Like the dream of some village chime,
  Which in youth we loved to hear,

And when all of this life is gone,--
  Even the hope, lingering now,
Like the last of the leaves left on
  Autumn's sere and faded bough,--
'Twill seem as still those friends were near,
  Who loved me in youth's early day,
If in that parting hour I hear
  The same sweet notes and die away,--
To that song of the olden time,
  Breathed, like Hope's farewell strain,
To say, in some brighter clime,
  Life and youth will shine again!






WAKE THEE, MY DEAR.


Wake thee, my dear--thy dreaming
  Till darker hours will keep;
While such a moon is beaming,
  'Tis wrong towards Heaven to sleep.

Moments there are we number,
  Moments of pain and care,
Which to oblivious slumber
  Gladly the wretch would spare.

But now,--who'd think of dreaming
  When Love his watch should keep?
While such a moon is beaming,
  'Tis wrong towards Heaven to sleep.

If e'er the fates should sever
  My life and hopes from thee, love,
The sleep that lasts for ever
  Would then be sweet to me, love;
But now,--away with dreaming!
  Till darker hours 'twill keep;
While such a moon is beaming,
  'Tis wrong towards Heaven to sleep.






THE BOY OF THE ALPS.


Lightly, Alpine rover,
Tread the mountains over;
Rude is the path thou'st yet to go;
  Snow cliffs hanging o'er thee,
  Fields of ice before thee,
While the hid torrent moans below.
Hark, the deep thunder,
Thro' the vales yonder!
'Tis the huge avalanche downward cast;
  From rock to rock
  Rebounds the shock.
But courage, boy! the danger's past.
  Onward, youthful rover,
  Tread the glacier over,
Safe shalt thou reach thy home at last.
On, ere light forsake thee,
Soon will dusk o'ertake thee:
O'er yon ice-bridge lies thy way!
  Now, for the risk prepare thee;
  Safe it yet may bear thee,
Tho' 'twill melt in morning's ray.

Hark, that dread howling!
'Tis the wolf prowling,--
Scent of thy track the foe hath got;
  And cliff and shore
  Resound his roar.
But courage, boy,--the danger's past!

  Watching eyes have found thee,
  Loving arms are round thee,
Safe hast thou reached thy father's cot.






FOR THEE ALONE.


For thee alone I brave the boundless deep,
Those eyes my light through every distant sea;
My waking thoughts, the dream that gilds my sleep,
  The noon-tide revery, all are given to thee,
      To thee alone, to thee alone.

Tho' future scenes present to Fancy's eye
  Fair forms of light that crowd the distant air,
When nearer viewed, the fairy phantoms fly,
  The crowds dissolve, and thou alone art there,
      Thou, thou alone.

To win thy smile, I speed from shore to shore,
  While Hope's sweet voice is heard in every blast,
Still whispering on that when some years are o'er,
  One bright reward shall crown my toil at last,
      Thy smile alone, thy smile alone,

Oh place beside the transport of that hour
  All earth can boast of fair, of rich, and bright,
Wealth's radiant mines, the lofty thrones of power,--
  Then ask where first thy lover's choice would light?
      On thee alone, on thee alone.






HER LAST WORDS, AT PARTING.


Her last words, at parting, how _can_ I forget?
  Deep treasured thro' life, in my heart they shall stay;
Like music, whose charm in the soul lingers yet,
  When its sounds from the ear have long melted away.
Let Fortune assail me, her threatenings are vain;
  Those still-breathing words shall my talisman be,--
"Remember, in absence, in sorrow, and pain,
  "There's one heart, unchanging, that beats but for thee."

From the desert's sweet well tho' the pilgrim must hie,
  Never more of that fresh-springing fountain to taste,
He hath still of its bright drops a treasured supply,
  Whose sweetness lends life to his lips thro' the waste.
So, dark as my fate is still doomed to remain,
  These words shall my well in the wilderness be,--
 "Remember, in absence, in sorrow, and pain,
  "There's one heart, unchanging, that beats but for thee."






LET'S TAKE THIS WORLD AS SOME WIDE SCENE.


Let's take this world as some wide scene.
  Thro' which in frail but buoyant boat,
With skies now dark and now serene,
  Together thou and I must float;
Beholding oft on either shore
  Bright spots where we should love to stay;
But Time plies swift his flying oar,
  And away we speed, away, away.

Should chilling winds and rains come on,
  We'll raise our awning 'gainst the shower;
Sit closer till the storm is gone,
  And, smiling, wait a sunnier hour.
And if that sunnier hour should shine,
  We'll know its brightness cannot stay,
But happy while 'tis thine and mine,

  Complain not when it fades away.
So shall we reach at last that Fall
  Down which life's currents all must go,--
The dark, the brilliant, destined all
  To sink into the void below.
Nor even that hour shall want its charms,
  If, side by side, still fond we keep,
And calmly, in each other's arms
  Together linked, go down the steep.






LOVE'S VICTORY.


Sing to Love--for, oh, 'twas he
  Who won the glorious day;
Strew the wreaths of victory
  Along the conqueror's way.
Yoke the Muses to his car,
  Let them sing each trophy won;
While his mother's joyous star
  Shall light the triumph on.

Hail to Love, to mighty Love,
  Let spirits sing around;
While the hill, the dale, and grove,
  With "mighty Love" resound;
Or, should a sigh of sorrow steal
  Amid the sounds thus echoed o'er,
'Twill but teach the god to feel
  His victories the more.

See his wings, like amethyst
  Of sunny Ind their hue;
Bright as when, by Psyche kist,
  They trembled thro' and thro'.
Flowers spring beneath his feet;
  Angel forms beside him run;
While unnumbered lips repeat
  "Love's victory is won!"
   Hail to Love, to mighty Love,
   etc,






SONG OF HERCULES TO HIS DAUGHTER.[1]


"I've been, oh, sweet daughter,
  "To fountain and sea,
"To seek in their water
  "Some bright gem for thee.
"Where diamonds were sleeping,
  "Their sparkle I sought,
"Where crystal was weeping,
  "Its tears I have caught.

"The sea-nymph I've courted
  "In rich coral halls;
"With Naiads have sported
  "By bright waterfalls.
"But sportive or tender,
  "Still sought I around
"That gem, with whose splendor
  "Thou yet shalt be crowned.

"And see, while I'm speaking,
  "Yon soft light afar;--
"The pearl I've been seeking
  "There floats like a star!
"In the deep Indian Ocean
  "I see the gem shine,
"And quick as light's motion
  "Its wealth shall be thine."

Then eastward, like lightning,
  The hero-god flew,
His sunny looks brightening
  The air he went thro'.
And sweet was the duty,
  And hallowed the hour,
Which saw thus young Beauty
  Embellished by Power.


[1] Founded on the fable reported by Arrian (in Indicis) of Hercules
having searched the Indian Ocean, to find the pearl with which he adorned
his daughter Pandaea.






THE DREAM OF HOME.


Who has not felt how sadly sweet
  The dream of home, the dream of home,
Steals o'er the heart, too soon to fleet,
  When far o'er sea or land we roam?
Sunlight more soft may o'er us fall,
  To greener shores our bark may come;
But far more bright, more dear than all,
  That dream of home, that dream of home.

Ask the sailor youth when far
  His light bark bounds o'er ocean's foam,
What charms him most, when evening's star
  Smiles o'er the wave? to dream of home.
Fond thoughts of absent friends and loves
  At that sweet hour around him come;
His heart's best joy where'er he roves,
  That dream of home, that dream of home.






THEY TELL ME THOU'RT THE FAVORED GUEST.


They tell me thou'rt the favored guest
  Of every fair and brilliant throng;
No wit like thine to wake the jest,
  No voice like thine to breathe the song;
And none could guess, so gay thou art,
That thou and I are far apart.

Alas! alas! how different flows
  With thee and me the time away!
Not that I wish thee sad--heaven knows--
  Still if thou canst, be light and gay;
I only know, that without thee
The sun himself is dark to me.

Do I thus haste to hall and bower,
  Among the proud and gay to shine?
Or deck my hair with gem and flower,
  To flatter other eyes than thine?
Ah, no, with me love's smiles are past
Thou hadst the first, thou hadst the last.






THE YOUNG INDIAN MAID.


    There came a nymph dancing
     Gracefully, gracefully,
    Her eye a light glancing
     Like the blue sea;
    And while all this gladness
     Around her steps hung,
    Such sweet notes of sadness
     Her gentle lips sung,
That ne'er while I live from my memory shall fade
The song or the look of that young Indian maid.

    Her zone of bells ringing
     Cheerily, cheerily,
    Chimed to her singing
     Light echoes of glee;
    But in vain did she borrow
     Of mirth the gay tone,
    Her voice spoke of sorrow,
     And sorrow alone.
Nor e'er while I live from my memory shall fade
The song or the look of that young Indian maid.






THE HOMEWARD MARCH.


Be still my heart: I hear them come:
  Those sounds announce my lover near:
The march that brings our warriors home
  Proclaims he'll soon be here.

    Hark, the distant tread,
    O'er the mountain's head,
While hills and dales repeat the sound;
    And the forest deer
    Stand still to hear,
As those echoing steps ring round.

Be still my heart. I hear them come,
  Those sounds that speak my soldier near;
Those joyous steps seem winged fox home.--
  Rest, rest, he'll soon be here.

But hark, more faint the footsteps grow,
  And now they wind to distant glades;
Not here their home,--alas, they go
  To gladden happier maids!

  Like sounds in a dream,
  The footsteps seem,
As down the hills they die away;
  And the march, whose song
  So pealed along,
Now fades like a funeral lay.

'Tis past, 'tis o'er,--hush, heart, thy pain!
  And tho' not here, alas, they come,
Rejoice for those, to whom that strain
  Brings sons and lovers home.






WAKE UP, SWEET MELODY.


  Wake up, sweet melody!
    Now is the hour
  When young and loving hearts
    Feel most thy power,
One note of music, by moonlight's soft ray--
Oh, 'tis worth thousands heard coldly by day.
  Then wake up, sweet melody!
    Now is the hour
  When young and loving hearts
    Feel most thy power.

  Ask the fond nightingale,
    When his sweet flower
  Loves most to hear his song,
    In her green bower?
Oh, he will tell thee, thro' summer-nights long,
Fondest she lends her whole soul to his song.
  Then wake up, sweet melody!
    Now is the hour
  When young and loving hearts
    Feel most thy power.






CALM BE THY SLEEP.


Calm be thy sleep as infant's slumbers!
  Pure as angel thoughts thy dreams!
May every joy this bright world numbers
  Shed o'er thee their mingled beams!
Or if, where Pleasure's wing hath glided,
  There ever must some pang remain,
Still be thy lot with me divided,--
  Thine all the bliss and mine the pain!

Day and night my thoughts shall hover
  Round thy steps where'er they stray;
As, even when clouds his idol cover,
  Fondly the Persian tracks its ray.
If this be wrong, if Heaven offended
  By worship to its creature be,
Then let my vows to both be blended,
  Half breathed to Heaven and half to thee.






THE EXILE.


Night waneth fast, the morning star
  Saddens with light the glimmering sea,
Whose waves shall soon to realms afar
  Waft me from hope, from love, and thee.
Coldly the beam from yonder sky
  Looks o'er the waves that onward stray;
But colder still the stranger's eye
  To him whose home is far away

Oh, not at hour so chill and bleak,
  Let thoughts of me come o'er thy breast;
But of the lost one think and speak,
  When summer suns sink calm to rest.
So, as I wander, Fancy's dream
  Shall bring me o'er the sunset seas,
Thy look in every melting beam,
  Thy whisper in each dying breeze.






THE FANCY FAIR.


Come, maids and youths, for here we sell
  All wondrous things of earth and air;
Whatever wild romancers tell,
  Or poets sing, or lovers swear,
  You'll find at this our Fancy Fair.

Here eyes are made like stars to shine,
  And kept for years in such repair,
That even when turned of thirty-nine,
  They'll hardly look the worse for wear,
  If bought at this our Fancy Fair.

We've lots of tears for bards to shower,
  And hearts that such ill usage bear,
That, tho' they're broken every hour,
  They'll still in rhyme fresh breaking bear,
  If purchased at our Fancy Fair.

As fashions change in every thing,
  We've goods to suit each season's air,
Eternal friendships for the spring,
  And endless loves for summer wear,--
  All sold at this our Fancy Fair.

We've reputations white as snow,
  That long will last if used with care,
Nay, safe thro' all life's journey go,
  If packed and marked as "brittle ware,"--
  Just purchased at the Fancy Fair.






IF THOU WOULDST HAVE ME SING AND PLAY.


If thou wouldst have me sing and play,
  As once I played and sung,
First take this time-worn lute away,
  And bring one freshly strung.
Call back the time when pleasure's sigh
First breathed among the strings;
And Time himself, in flitting by.
  Made music with his wings.

But how is this? tho' new the lute,
  And shining fresh the chords,
Beneath this hand they slumber mute,
  Or speak but dreamy words.
In vain I seek the soul that dwelt
  Within that once sweet shell,
Which told so warmly what it felt,
  And felt what naught could tell.

Oh, ask not then for passion's lay,
  From lyre so coldly strung;
With this I ne'er can sing or play,
  As once I played and sung.
No, bring that long-loved lute again,--
  Tho' chilled by years it be,
If _thou_ wilt call the slumbering strain,
  'Twill wake again for thee.

Tho' time have frozen the tuneful stream
  Of thoughts that gushed along,
One look from thee, like summer's beam,
  Will thaw them into song.
Then give, oh give, that wakening ray,
  And once more blithe and young,
Thy bard again will sing and play,
  As once he played and sung.






STILL WHEN DAYLIGHT.


Still when daylight o'er the wave
Bright and soft its farewell gave,
I used to hear, while light was falling,
O'er the wave a sweet voice calling,
  Mournfully at distance calling.

Ah! once how blest that maid would come,
To meet her sea-boy hastening home;
And thro' the night those sounds repeating,
Hail his bark with joyous greeting,
  Joyously his light bark greeting.

But, one sad night, when winds were high,
Nor earth, nor heaven could hear her cry.
She saw his boat come tossing over
Midnight's wave,--but not her lover!
  No, never more her lover.

And still that sad dream loath to leave,
She comes with wandering mind at eve,
And oft we hear, when night is falling,
Faint her voice thro' twilight calling,
  Mournfully at twilight calling.






THE SUMMER WEBS.


The summer webs that float and shine,
  The summer dews that fall,
Tho' light they be, this heart of mine
  Is lighter still than all.
It tells me every cloud is past
  Which lately seemed to lour;
That Hope hath wed young Joy at last,
  And now's their nuptial hour!

With light thus round, within, above,
  With naught to wake one sigh,
Except the wish that all we love
  Were at this moment nigh,--
It seems as if life's brilliant sun
  Had stopt in full career,
To make this hour its brightest one,
And rest in radiance here.






MIND NOT THO' DAYLIGHT.


Mind not tho' daylight around us is breaking,--
Who'd think now of sleeping when morn's but just waking?
Sound the merry viol, and daylight or not,
Be all for one hour in the gay dance forgot.

See young Aurora up heaven's hill advancing,
Tho' fresh from her pillow, even she too is dancing:
While thus all creation, earth, heaven, and sea.
Are dancing around us, oh, why should not we?

Who'll say that moments we use thus are wasted?
Such sweet drops of time only flow to be tasted;
While hearts are high beating and harps full in tune,
The fault is all morning's for coming so soon.






THEY MET BUT ONCE.


They met but once, in youth's sweet hour,
  And never since that day
Hath absence, time, or grief had power
  To chase that dream away.
They've seen the suns of other skies,
  On other shores have sought delight;
But never more to bless their eyes
  Can come a dream so bright!
They met but once,--a day was all
  Of Love's young hopes they knew;
And still their hearts that day recall
  As fresh as then it flew.

Sweet dream of youth! oh, ne'er again
  Let either meet the brow
They left so smooth and smiling then,
  Or see what it is now.
For, Youth, the spell was only thine,
  From thee alone the enchantment flows,
That makes the world around thee shine
  With light thyself bestows.
They met but once,--oh, ne'er again
  Let either meet the brow
They left so smooth and smiling then,
  Or see what it is now.






WITH MOONLIGHT BEAMING.


With moonlight beaming
  Thus o'er the deep,
Who'd linger dreaming
  In idle sleep?
Leave joyless souls to live by day,--
Our life begins with yonder ray;
And while thus brightly
  The moments flee,
Our barks skim lightly
  The shining sea.

To halls of splendor
  Let great ones hie;
Thro' light more tender
  Our pathways lie.
While round, from banks of brook or lake,
Our company blithe echoes make;
And as we lend 'em
  Sweet word or strain,
Still back they send 'em
  More sweet again.






CHILD'S SONG.

FROM A MASQUE.


I have a garden of my own,
  Shining with flowers of every hue;
I loved it dearly while alone,
  But I shall love it more with you:
And there the golden bees shall come,
  In summer-time at break of morn,
And wake us with their busy hum
  Around the Siha's fragrant thorn.

I have a fawn from Aden's land,
  On leafy buds and berries nurst;
And you shall feed him from your hand,
 Though he may start with fear at first.
And I will lead you where he lies
  For shelter in the noontide heat;
And you may touch his sleeping eyes,
  And feel his little silvery feet.






THE HALCYON HANGS O'ER OCEAN.


The halcyon hangs o'er ocean,
  The sea-lark skims the brine;
This bright world's all in motion,
  No heart seems sad but mine.

To walk thro' sun-bright places,
  With heart all cold the while;
To look in smiling faces,
  When we no more can smile;

To feel, while earth and heaven
  Around thee shine with bliss,
To thee no light is given,--
  Oh, what a doom is this!






THE WORLD WAS HUSHT.


The world was husht, the moon above
  Sailed thro' ether slowly,
When near the casement of my love,
  Thus I whispered lowly,--
"Awake, awake, how canst thou sleep?
  "The field I seek to-morrow
"Is one where man hath fame to reap,
  "And woman gleans but sorrow."

"Let battle's field be what it may.
  Thus spoke a voice replying,
"Think not thy love, while thou'rt away,
  "Will sit here idly sighing.
"No--woman's soul, if not for fame,
  "For love can brave all danger!
Then forth from out the casement came
  A plumed and armed stranger.

A stranger? No; 'twas she, the maid,
  Herself before me beaming,
With casque arrayed and falchion blade
  Beneath her girdle gleaming!
Close side by side, in freedom's fight,
  That blessed morning found us;
In Victory's light we stood ere night,
  And Love the morrow crowned us!






THE TWO LOVES.


There are two Loves, the poet sings,
  Both born of Beauty at a birth:
The one, akin to heaven, hath wings,
  The other, earthly, walks on earth.
With _this_ thro' bowers below we play,
  With _that_ thro' clouds above we soar;
With both, perchance, may lose our way:--
    Then, tell me which,
  Tell me which shall we adore?

The one, when tempted down from air,
  At Pleasure's fount to lave his lip,
Nor lingers long, nor oft will dare
  His wing within the wave to dip.
While plunging deep and long beneath,
  The other bathes him o'er and o'er
In that sweet current, even to death:--
    Then, tell me which,
  Tell me which shall we adore?

The boy of heaven, even while he lies
  In Beauty's lap, recalls his home;
And when most happy, inly sighs
  For something happier still to come.
While he of earth, too fully blest
  With this bright world to dream of more,
Sees all his heaven on Beauty's breast:--
    Then, tell me which,
  Tell me which shall we adore?

The maid who heard the poet sing
  These twin-desires of earth and sky,
And saw while one inspired his string,
  The other glistened in his eye,--
To name the earthlier boy ashamed,
  To chose the other fondly loath,
At length all blushing she exclaimed,--
    "Ask not which,
  "Oh, ask not which--we'll worship both.

"The extremes of each thus taught to shun,
  "With hearts and souls between them given,
"When weary of this earth with one,
  "We'll with the other wing to heaven."
Thus pledged the maid her vow of bliss;
And while _one_ Love wrote down the oath,
The other sealed it with a kiss;
    And Heaven looked on,
  Heaven looked on and hallowed both.






THE LEGEND OF PUCK THE FAIRY.


Wouldst know what tricks, by the pale moonlight,
  Are played by me, the merry little Sprite,
Who wing thro' air from the camp to the court,
From king to clown, and of all make sport;
    Singing, I am the Sprite
    Of the merry midnight,
Who laugh at weak mortals and love the moonlight.

To a miser's bed, where he snoring slept
And dreamt of his cash, I slyly crept;
Chink, chink o'er his pillow like money I rang,
And he waked to catch--but away I sprang,
    Singing, I am the Sprite, etc.

I saw thro' the leaves, in a damsel's bower,
She was waiting her love at that starlight hour:
"Hist--hist!" quoth I, with an amorous sigh,
And she flew to the door, but away flew I,
    Singing, I am the Sprite, etc.

While a bard sat inditing an ode to his love,
Like a pair of blue meteors I stared from above,
And he swooned--for he thought 'twas the ghost, poor man!
Of his lady's eyes, while away I ran,
    Singing, I am the Sprite, etc.






BEAUTY AND SONG.


Down in yon summer vale,
  Where the rill flows.
Thus said a Nightingale
  To his loved Rose:--
"Tho' rich the pleasures
"Of song's sweet measures,
"Vain were its melody,
"Rose, without thee."

Then from the green recess
  Of her night-bower,
Beaming with bashfulness,
  Spoke the bright flower:--
"Tho' morn should lend her
"Its sunniest splendor,
"What would the Rose be,
"Unsung by thee?"

Thus still let Song attend
  Woman's bright way;
Thus still let woman lend
  Light to the lay.
Like stars thro' heaven's sea
Floating in harmony
Beauty should glide along
Circled by Song.






WHEN THOU ART NIGH.


When thou art nigh, it seems
  A new creation round;
The sun hath fairer beams,
  The lute a softer sound.
Tho' thee alone I see,
  And hear alone thy sigh,
'Tis light, 'tis song to me,
  Tis all--when thou art nigh.

When thou art nigh, no thought
  Of grief comes o'er my heart;
I only think--could aught
  But joy be where thou art?
Life seems a waste of breath,
  When far from thee I sigh;
And death--ay, even death
  Were sweet, if thou wert nigh.






SONG OF A HYPERBOREAN.


I come from a land in the sun bright deep,
  Where golden gardens grow;
Where the winds of the north, be calmed in sleep,
  Their conch-shells never blow.[1]
    Haste to that holy Isle with me,
      Haste--haste!

So near the track of the stars are we,
  That oft on night's pale beams
The distant sounds of their harmony
  Come to our ear, like dreams.
    Then haste to that holy Isle with me, etc.

The Moon too brings her world so nigh,
  That when the night-seer looks
To that shadowless orb, in a vernal sky,
  He can number its hills and brooks.
        Then, haste, etc.

To the Sun-god all our hearts and lyres[2]
  By day, by night, belong;
And the breath we draw from his living fires,
  We give him back in song.
            Then, haste, etc.

From us descends the maid who brings
  To Delos gifts divine;
And our wild bees lend their rainbow wings
  To glitter on Delphi's shrine.
    Then haste to that holy Isle with me,
      Haste--haste!


[1] On the Tower of the Winds, at Athens, there is a conch shell placed in
the hands of Boreas.--See _Stuart's Antiquities_. "The north wind," says
Herodotus, in speaking of the Hyperboreans, "never blows with them."

[2] Hecataeus tells us, that this Hyperborean island was dedicated to
Apollo; and most of the inhabitants were either priests or songsters.






THOU BIDST ME SING.


Thou bidst me sing the lay I sung to thee
  In other days ere joy had left this brow;
But think, tho' still unchanged the notes may be,
  How different feels the heart that breathes them now!
The rose thou wearst to-night is still the same
  We saw this morning on its stem so gay;
But, ah! that dew of dawn, that breath which came
  Like life o'er all its leaves, hath past away.

Since first that music touched thy heart and mine,
  How many a joy and pain o'er both have past,--
The joy, a light too precious long to shine,--
  The pain, a cloud whose shadows always last.
And tho' that lay would like the voice of home
  Breathe o'er our ear, 'twould waken now a sigh--
Ah! not, as then, for fancied woes to come,
  But, sadder far, for real bliss gone by.






CUPID ARMED.


  Place the helm on thy brow,
    In thy hand take the spear;--
  Thou art armed, Cupid, now,
    And thy battle-hour is near.
March on! march on! thy shaft and bow
  Were weak against such charms;
March on! march on! so proud a foe
  Scorns all but martial arms.

  See the darts in her eyes,
    Tipt with scorn, how they shine!
  Every shaft, as it flies,
    Mocking proudly at thine.
March on! march on! thy feathered darts
  Soft bosoms soon might move;
But ruder arms to ruder hearts
  Must teach what 'tis to love.
  Place the helm on thy brow;
    In thy hand take the spear,--
  Thou art armed, Cupid, now,
    And thy battle-hour is near.






ROUND THE WORLD GOES.


Round the world goes, by day and night,
  While with it also round go we;
And in the flight of one day's light
  An image of all life's course we see.
Round, round, while thus we go round,
  The best thing a man can do,
Is to make it, at least, a _merry_-go-round,
  By--sending the wine round too.

Our first gay stage of life is when
  Youth in its dawn salutes the eye--
Season of bliss! Oh, who wouldn't then
  Wish to cry, "Stop!" to earth and sky?
But, round, round, both boy and girl
  Are whisked thro' that sky of blue;
And much would their hearts enjoy the whirl,
If--their heads didn't whirl round too.

Next, we enjoy our glorious noon,
  Thinking all life a life of light;
But shadows come on, 'tis evening soon,
  And ere we can say, "How short!"--'tis night.
Round, round, still all goes round,
  Even while I'm thus singing to you;
And the best way to make it a _merry_-go-round,
  Is to--chorus my song round too.






OH, DO NOT LOOK SO BRIGHT AND BLEST.


Oh, do not look so bright and blest,
  For still there comes a fear,
When brow like thine looks happiest,
  That grief is then most near.
There lurks a dread in all delight,
  A shadow near each ray,
That warns us then to fear their flight,
  When most we wish their stay.
Then look not thou so bright and blest,
  For ah! there comes a fear,
When brow like thine looks happiest,
  That grief is then most near.

Why is it thus that fairest things
  The soonest fleet and die?--
That when most light is on their wings,
  They're then but spread to fly!
And, sadder still, the pain will stay--
  The bliss no more appears;
As rainbows take their light away,
  And leave us but the tears!
Then look not thou so bright and blest,
  For ah! there comes a fear,
When brow like thine looks happiest,
  That grief is then most near.






THE MUSICAL BOX.


"Look here," said Rose, with laughing eyes,
  "Within this box, by magic hid,
"A tuneful Sprite imprisoned lies,
  "Who sings to me whene'er he's bid.
"Tho' roving once his voice and wing,
  "He'll now lie still the whole day long;
"Till thus I touch the magic spring--
  "Then hark, how sweet and blithe his song!"
      _(A symphony.)_

"Ah, Rose," I cried, "the poet's lay
  "Must ne'er even Beauty's slave become;
"Thro' earth and air his song may stray,
  "If all the while his heart's at home.
"And tho' in freedom's air he dwell,
  "Nor bond nor chain his spirit knows,
"Touch but the spring thou knowst so well,
  "And--hark, how sweet the love-song flows!"
      _(A symphony.)_

Thus pleaded I for freedom's right;
  But when young Beauty takes the field,
And wise men seek defence in flight,
  The doom of poets is to yield.
No more my heart the enchantress braves,
  I'm now in Beauty's prison hid;
The Sprite and I are fellow slaves,
  And I, too, sing whene'er I'm bid.






WHEN TO SAD MUSIC SILENT YOU LISTEN.


When to sad Music silent you listen,
  And tears on those eyelids tremble like dew,
Oh, then there dwells in those eyes as they glisten
  A sweet holy charm that mirth never knew.
But when some lively strain resounding
  Lights up the sunshine of joy on that brow,
Then the young reindeer o'er the hills bounding
  Was ne'er in its mirth so graceful as thou.

When on the skies at midnight thou gazest.
  A lustre so pure thy features then wear,
That, when to some star that bright eye thou raisest,
  We feel 'tis thy home thou'rt looking for there.
But when the word for the gay dance is given,
  So buoyant thy spirit, so heartfelt thy mirth,
Oh then we exclaim, "Ne'er leave earth for heaven,
  "But linger still here, to make heaven of earth."






THE LANGUAGE OF FLOWERS.


Fly swift, my light gazelle,
  To her who now lies waking,
To hear thy silver bell
  The midnight silence breaking.
And, when thou com'st, with gladsome feet,
  Beneath her lattice springing,
Ah, well she'll know how sweet
  The words of love thou'rt bringing.

Yet, no--not words, for they
  But half can tell love's feeling;
Sweet flowers alone can say
  What passion fears revealing.
A once bright rose's withered leaf,
  A towering lily broken,--
Oh these may paint a grief
  No words could e'er have spoken.

Not such, my gay gazelle,
  The wreath thou speedest over
Yon moonlight dale, to tell
  My lady how I love her.
And, what to her will sweeter be
  Than gems the richest, rarest,--
From Truth's immortal tree[1]
  One fadeless leaf thou bearest.


[1] The tree called in the East, Amrita, or the Immortal.






THE DAWN IS BREAKING O'ER US.


The dawn is breaking o'er us,
  See, heaven hath caught its hue!
We've day's long light before us,
What sport shall we pursue?
The hunt o'er hill and lea?
The sail o'er summer sea?
Oh let not hour so sweet
Unwinged by pleasure fleet.
The dawn is breaking o'er us,
  See, heaven hath caught its hue!
We've days long light before us,
  What sport shall we pursue?

But see, while we're deciding,
  What morning sport to play,
The dial's hand is gliding,
  And morn hath past away!
Ah, who'd have thought that noon
  Would o'er us steal so soon,--
That morn's sweet hour of prime
  Would last so short a time?
But come, we've day before us,
  Still heaven looks bright and blue;
Quick, quick, ere eve comes o'er us,
  What sport shall we pursue?

Alas! why thus delaying?
  We're now at evening's hour;
Its farewell beam is playing
  O'er hill and wave and bower.
That light we thought would last,
Behold, even now 'tis past;
And all our morning dreams
Have vanisht with its beams
But come! 'twere vain to borrow
  Sad lessons from this lay,
For man will be to-morrow--
  Just what he's been to-day.








UNPUBLISHED SONGS.

ETC.






ASK NOT IF STILL I LOVE.


Ask not if still I love,
  Too plain these eyes have told thee;
Too well their tears must prove
  How near and dear I hold thee.
If, where the brightest shine,
To see no form but thine,
To feel that earth can show
  No bliss above thee,--
If this be love, then know
  That thus, that thus, I love thee.

'Tis not in pleasure's idle hour
That thou canst know affection's power.
No, try its strength in grief or pain;
  Attempt as now its bonds to sever,
Thou'lt find true love's a chain
  That binds forever!






DEAR? YES.


Dear? yes, tho' mine no more,
  Even this but makes thee dearer;
And love, since hope is o'er,
  But draws thee nearer.

Change as thou wilt to me,
The same thy charm must be;
New loves may come to weave
  Their witchery o'er thee,
Yet still, tho' false, believe
  That I adore thee, yes, still adore thee.
Think'st thou that aught but death could end
A tie not falsehood's self can rend?
No, when alone, far off I die,
  No more to see, no more cares thee,
Even then, my life's last sigh
  Shall be to bless thee, yes, still to bless thee.






UNBIND THEE, LOVE.


Unbind thee, love, unbind thee, love,
  From those dark ties unbind thee;
Tho' fairest hand the chain hath wove,
  Too long its links have twined thee.
Away from earth!--thy wings were made
  In yon mid-sky to hover,
With earth beneath their dove-like shade,
  And heaven all radiant over.

Awake thee, boy, awake thee, boy,
  Too long thy soul is sleeping;
And thou mayst from this minute's joy
  Wake to eternal weeping.
Oh, think, this world is not for thee;
  Tho' hard its links to sever;
Tho' sweet and bright and dear they be,
  Break or thou'rt lost for ever.






THERE'S SOMETHING STRANGE.

A BUFFALO SONG.


There's something strange, I know not what,
        Come o'er me,
Some phantom I've for ever got
        Before me.
I look on high and in the sky
        'Tis shining;
On earth, its light with all things bright
        Seems twining.
In vain I try this goblin's spells
        To sever;
Go where I will, it round me dwells
        For ever.

And then what tricks by day and night
        It plays me;
In every shape the wicked sprite
        Waylays me.
Sometimes like two bright eyes of blue
        'Tis glancing;
Sometimes like feet, in slippers neat,
        Comes dancing.
By whispers round of every sort
        I'm taunted.
Never was mortal man, in short,
        So haunted.






NOT FROM THEE.


Not from thee the wound should come,
  No, not from thee.
Care not what or whence my doom,
  So not from thee!
Cold triumph! first to make
  This heart thy own;
And then the mirror break
  Where fixt thou shin'st alone.
Not from thee the wound should come,
  Oh, not from thee.
I care not what, or whence, my doom,
  So not from thee.

Yet no--my lips that wish recall;
  From thee, from thee--
If ruin o'er this head must fall,
  'Twill welcome be.
Here to the blade I bare
  This faithful heart;
Wound deep--thou'lt find that there,
  In every pulse thou art.
Yes from thee I'll bear it all:
  If ruin be
The doom that o'er this heart must fall,
  'Twere sweet from thee.






GUESS, GUESS.


I love a maid, a mystic maid,
  Whose form no eyes but mine can see;
She comes in light, she comes in shade,
  And beautiful in both is she.
Her shape in dreams I oft behold,
  And oft she whispers in my ear
Such words as when to others told,
  Awake the sigh, or wring the tear;
Then guess, guess, who she,
The lady of my love, may be.

I find the lustre of her brow,
  Come o'er me in my darkest ways;
And feel as if her voice, even now,
  Were echoing far off my lays.
There is no scene of joy or woe
  But she doth gild with influence bright;
And shed o'er all so rich a glow
  As makes even tears seem full of light:
Then guess, guess, who she,
The lady of my love, may be.






WHEN LOVE, WHO RULED.


When Love, who ruled as Admiral o'er
Has rosy mother's isles of light,
Was cruising off the Paphian shore,
  A sail at sunset hove in sight.
"A chase, a chase! my Cupids all,"
Said Love, the little Admiral.

Aloft the winged sailors sprung,
  And, swarming up the mast like bees,
The snow-white sails expanding flung,
  Like broad magnolias to the breeze.
"Yo ho, yo ho, my Cupids all!"
Said Love, the little Admiral.

The chase was o'er--the bark was caught,
  The winged crew her freight explored;
And found 'twas just as Love had thought,
  For all was contraband aboard.
"A prize, a prize, my Cupids all!"
Said Love, the little Admiral.

Safe stowed in many a package there,
  And labelled slyly o'er, as "Glass,"
Were lots of all the illegal ware,
  Love's Custom-House forbids to pass.
"O'erhaul, o'erhaul, my Cupids all,"
Said Love, the little Admiral.

False curls they found, of every hue,
  With rosy blushes ready made;
And teeth of ivory, good as new,
  For veterans in the smiling trade.
"Ho ho, ho ho, my Cupids all,"
Said Love, the little Admiral.

Mock sighs, too,--kept in bags for use,
  Like breezes bought of Lapland seers,--
Lay ready here to be let loose,
  When wanted, in young spinsters' ears.
"Ha ha, ha ha, my Cupids all,"
Said Love, the little Admiral.

False papers next on board were found,
  Sham invoices of flames and darts,
Professedly for Paphos bound,
  But meant for Hymen's golden marts.
"For shame, for shame, my Cupids all!"
Said Love, the little Admiral.

Nay, still to every fraud awake,
  Those pirates all Love's signals knew,
And hoisted oft his flag, to make
  Rich wards and heiresses _bring-to_.[1]
"A foe, a foe, my Cupids all!"
Said Love, the little Admiral.

"This must not be," the boy exclaims,
  "In vain I rule the Paphian seas,
"If Love's and Beauty's sovereign names
  "Are lent to cover frauds like these.
"Prepare, prepare, my Cupids all!"
Said Love, the little Admiral.

Each Cupid stood with lighted match--
  A broadside struck the smuggling foe,
And swept the whole unhallowed batch
  Of Falsehood to the depths below.
"Huzza, huzza! my Cupids all!"
Said Love the little Admiral.


[1] "_To Bring-to_, to check the course of a ship."--_Falconer_.






STILL THOU FLIEST.


Still thou fliest, and still I woo thee,
  Lovely phantom,--all in vain;
Restless ever, my thoughts pursue thee,
  Fleeting ever, thou mock'st their pain.
Such doom, of old, that youth betided,
  Who wooed, he thought, some angel's charms,
But found a cloud that from him glided,--
  As thou dost from these outstretched arms.

Scarce I've said, "How fair thou shinest,"
  Ere thy light hath vanished by;
And 'tis when thou look'st divinest
  Thou art still most sure to fly.
Even as the lightning, that, dividing
  The clouds of night, saith, "Look on me,"
Then flits again, its splendor hiding.--
  Even such the glimpse I catch of thee.






THEN FIRST FROM LOVE.


Then first from Love, in Nature's bowers,
  Did Painting learn her fairy skill,
And cull the hues of loveliest flowers,
  To picture woman lovelier still.
For vain was every radiant hue,
  Till Passion lent a soul to art,
And taught the painter, ere he drew,
  To fix the model in his heart.

Thus smooth his toil awhile went on,
  Till, lo, one touch his art defies;
The brow, the lip, the blushes shone,
  But who could dare to paint those eyes?
'Twas all in vain the painter strove;
  So turning to that boy divine,
"Here take," he said, "the pencil, Love,
  "No hand should paint such eyes but thine."






HUSH, SWEET LUTE.


Hush, sweet Lute, thy songs remind me
  Of past joys, now turned to pain;
Of ties that long have ceased to bind me,
  But whose burning marks remain.
In each tone, some echo falleth
  On my ear of joys gone by;
Every note some dream recalleth
  Of bright hopes but born to die.

Yet, sweet Lute, though pain it bring me,
  Once more let thy numbers thrill;
Tho' death were in the strain they sing me,
  I must woo its anguish still.
Since no time can e'er recover
  Love's sweet light when once 'tis set,--
Better to weep such pleasures over,
  Than smile o'er any left us yet.






BRIGHT MOON.


Bright moon, that high in heaven art shining,
  All smiles, as if within thy bower to-night
Thy own Endymion lay reclining,
  And thou wouldst wake him with a kiss of light!--
By all the bliss thy beam discovers,
  By all those visions far too bright for day,
Which dreaming bards and waking lovers
  Behold, this night, beneath thy lingering ray,--

I pray thee, queen of that bright heaven,
  Quench not to-night thy love-lamp in the sea,
Till Anthe, in this bower, hath given
  Beneath thy beam, her long-vowed kiss to me.
Guide hither, guide her steps benighted,
  Ere thou, sweet moon, thy bashful crescent hide;
Let Love but in this bower be lighted,
  Then shroud in darkness all the world beside.






LONG YEARS HAVE PAST.


Long years have past, old friend, since we
  First met in life's young day;
And friends long loved by thee and me,
  Since then have dropt away;--
But enough remain to cheer us on,
  And sweeten, when thus we're met,
The glass we fill to the many gone,
  And the few who're left us yet.
Our locks, old friend, now thinly grow,
  And some hang white and chill;
While some, like flowers mid Autumn's snow,
  Retain youth's color still.
And so, in our hearts, tho' one by one,
  Youth's sunny hopes have set,
Thank heaven, not all their light is gone,--
  We've some to cheer us yet.

Then here's to thee, old friend, and long
  May thou and I thus meet,
To brighten still with wine and song
  This short life, ere it fleet.
And still as death comes stealing on,
  Let's never, old friend, forget,
Even while we sigh o'er blessings gone,
  How many are left us yet.






DREAMING FOR EVER.


Dreaming for ever, vainly dreaming,
  Life to the last, pursues its flight;
Day hath its visions fairly beaming,
  But false as those of night.
The one illusion, the other real,
  But both the same brief dreams at last;
And when we grasp the bliss ideal,
  Soon as it shines, 'tis past.

Here, then, by this dim lake reposing,
  Calmly I'll watch, while light and gloom
Flit o'er its face till night is closing--
  Emblem of life's short doom!
But tho', by turns, thus dark and shining,
  'Tis still unlike man's changeful day,
Whose light returns not, once declining,
  Whose cloud, once come, will stay.






THO' LIGHTLY SOUNDS THE SONG I SING.

A SONG OF THE ALPS.


Tho' lightly sounds the song I sing to thee,
Tho' like the lark's its soaring music be,
Thou'lt find even here some mournful note that tells
How near such April joy to weeping dwells.
'Tis 'mong the gayest scenes that oftenest steal
Those saddening thoughts we fear, yet love to feel;
And music never half so sweet appears,
As when her mirth forgets itself in tears.

Then say not thou this Alpine song is gay--
It comes from hearts that, like their mountain-lay,
Mix joy with pain, and oft when pleasure's breath
Most warms the surface feel most sad beneath.
The very beam in which the snow-wreath wears
Its gayest smile is that which wins its tears,--
And passion's power can never lend the glow
Which wakens bliss, without some touch of woe.






THE RUSSIAN LOVER.


Fleetly o'er the moonlight snows
  Speed we to my lady's bower;
Swift our sledge as lightning goes,
  Nor shall stop till morning's hour.
Bright, my steed, the northern star
  Lights us from yon jewelled skies;
But to greet us, brighter far,
  Morn shall bring my lady's eyes.
Lovers, lulled in sunny bowers,
  Sleeping out their dream of time,
Know not half the bliss that's ours,
  In this snowy, icy clime.
Like yon star that livelier gleams
  From the frosty heavens around,
Love himself the keener beams
  When with snows of coyness crowned.
Fleet then on, my merry steed,
  Bound, my sledge, o'er hill and dale;--
What can match a lover's speed?
  See, 'tis daylight, breaking pale!
Brightly hath the northern star
  Lit us from yon radiant Skies;
But, behold, how brighter far
  Yonder shine my lady's eyes!








A SELECTION FROM THE SONGS IN

M. P.; OR, THE BLUE-STOCKING:

A COMIC OPERA IN THREE ACTS.

1811.






BOAT GLEE.


The song that lightens the languid way,
    When brows are glowing,
    And faint with rowing,
Is like the spell of Hope's airy lay,
To whose sound thro' life we stray;
The beams that flash on the oar awhile,
  As we row along thro' the waves so clear,
Illume its spray, like the fleeting smile
  That shines o'er sorrow's tear.

Nothing is lost on him who sees
  With an eye that feeling gave;--
For him there's a story in every breeze,
  And a picture in every wave.
Then sing to lighten the languid way;
    When brows are glowing,
    And faint with rowing,
'Tis like the spell of Hope's airy lay,
To whose sound thro' life we stray.

       *       *       *       *       *

'Tis sweet to behold when the billows are sleeping,
  Some gay-colored bark moving gracefully by;
No damp on her deck but the eventide's weeping,
  No breath in her sails but the summer wind's sigh.
Yet who would not turn with a fonder emotion,
  To gaze on the life-boat, tho' rugged and worn.
Which often hath wafted o'er hills of the ocean
  The lost light of hope to the seaman forlorn!

Oh! grant that of those who in life's sunny slumber
  Around us like summer-barks idly have played,
When storms are abroad we may find in the number
  One friend, like the life-boat, to fly to our aid.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Lelia touched the lute,
  Not _then_ alone 'twas felt,
But when the sounds were mute,
  In memory still they dwelt.
Sweet lute! in nightly slumbers
Still we heard thy morning numbers.

Ah, how could she who stole
  Such breath from simple wire,
Be led, in pride of soul,
  To string with gold her lyre?
Sweet lute! thy chords she breaketh;
Golden now the strings she waketh!

But where are all the tales
  Her lute so sweetly told?
In lofty themes she fails,
  And soft ones suit not gold.
Rich lute! we see thee glisten,
But, alas! no more we listen!

       *       *       *       *       *

Young Love lived once in a humble shed,
   Where roses breathing
   And woodbines wreathing
Around the lattice their tendrils spread,
As wild and sweet as the life he led.
   His garden flourisht,
   For young Hope nourisht.
The infant buds with beams and showers;
But lips, tho' blooming, must still be fed,
  And not even Love can live on flowers.

Alas! that Poverty's evil eye
   Should e'er come hither,
   Such sweets to wither!
The flowers laid down their heads to die,
And Hope fell sick as the witch drew nigh.
   She came one morning.
   Ere Love had warning,
  And raised the latch, where the young god lay;
"Oh ho!" said Love--"is it you? good-by;"
  So he oped the window and flew away!

       *       *       *       *       *

Spirit of Joy, thy altar lies
  In youthful hearts that hope like mine;
And 'tis the light of laughing eyes
  That leads us to thy fairy shrine.

There if we find the sigh, the tear,
  They are not those to sorrow known;
But breathe so soft, and drop so clear,
  That bliss may claim them for her own.
Then give me, give me, while I weep,
  The sanguine hope that brightens woe,
And teaches even our tears to keep
  The tinge of pleasure as they flow.

The child who sees the dew of night
  Upon the spangled hedge at morn,
Attempts to catch the drops of light,
  But wounds his finger with the thorn.
Thus oft the brightest joys we seek,
  Are lost when touched, and turned to pain;
The flush they kindle leaves the cheek,
  The tears they waken long remain.
But give me, give me, etc.

       *       *       *       *       *

To sigh, yet feel no pain.
  To weep, yet scarce know why;
To sport an hour with Beauty's chain,
  Then throw it idly by;
To kneel at many a shrine,
  Yet lay the heart on none;
To think all other charms divine,
  But those we just have won;
This is love, careless love,
Such as kindleth hearts that rove.

To keep one sacred flame,
  Thro' life unchilled, unmoved,
To love in wintry age the same
  As first in youth we loved;
To feel that we adore
  To such refined excess.
That tho' the heart would break with _more_,
  We could not live with _less_;
This is love, faithful love,
Such as saints might feel above.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dear aunt, in the olden time of love,
  When women like slaves were spurned,
A maid gave her heart, as she would her glove,
 To be teased by a fop, and returned!
But women grow wiser as men improve.
And, tho' beaux, like monkeys, amuse us,
Oh! think not we'd give such a delicate gem
As the heart to be played with or sullied by them;
  No, dearest aunt, excuse us.

We may know by the head on Cupid's seal
  What impression the heart will take;
If shallow the head, oh! soon we feel
  What a poor impression 'twill make!
Tho' plagued, Heaven knows! by the foolish zeal
Of the fondling fop who pursues me,
Oh, think not I'd follow their desperate rule,
Who get rid of the folly by wedding the fool;
  No, dearest aunt! excuse me.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Charles was deceived by the maid he loved,
  We saw no cloud his brow o'er-casting,
But proudly he smiled as if gay and unmoved,
  Tho' the wound in his heart was deep and lasting.
And oft at night when the tempest rolled
  He sung as he paced the dark deck over--
"Blow, wind, blow! thou art not so cold
As the heart of a maid that deceives her lover."

Yet he lived with the happy and seemed to be gay,
  Tho' the wound but sunk more deep for concealing;
And Fortune threw many a thorn in his way,
  Which, true to one anguish, he trod without feeling!
And still by the frowning of Fate unsubdued
  He sung as if sorrow had placed him above her--
"Frown, Fate, frown! thou art not so rude
  As the heart of a maid that deceives her lover."

At length his career found a close in death,
  The close he long wished to his cheerless roving,
For Victory shone on his latest breath,
  And he died in a cause of his heart's approving.
But still he remembered his sorrow,--and still
  He sung till the vision of life was over--
"Come, death, come! thou art not so chill
  As the heart of a maid that deceives her lover."

       *       *       *       *       *

When life looks lone and dreary,
  What light can dispel the gloom?
When Time's swift wing grows weary,
  What charm can refresh his plume?
'Tis woman whose sweetness beameth
  O'er all that we feel or see;
And if man of heaven e'er dreameth,
  'Tis when he thinks purely of thee,
          O woman!

Let conquerors fight for glory,
  Too dearly the meed they gain;
Let patriots live in story--
  Too often they die in vain;
Give kingdoms to those who choose 'em,
  This world can offer to me
No throne like Beauty's bosom,
  No freedom like serving thee,
          O woman!






CUPID'S LOTTERY.


A lottery, a Lottery,
In Cupid's court there used to be;
    Two roguish eyes
    The highest prize
In Cupid's scheming Lottery;
    And kisses, too,
    As good as new,
Which weren't very hard to win,
    For he who won
    The eyes of fun
Was sure to have the kisses in
       A Lottery, a Lottery, etc.

This Lottery, this Lottery,
In Cupid's court went merrily,
    And Cupid played
    A Jewish trade
In this his scheming Lottery;
    For hearts, we're told,
    In _shares_ he sold
To many a fond believing drone,
    And cut the hearts
    In sixteen parts
So well, each thought the whole his own.
   _Chor_.--A Lottery, a Lottery, etc.

       *       *       *       *       *

Tho' sacred the tie that our country entwineth,
  And dear to the heart her remembrance remains,
Yet dark are the ties where no liberty shineth,
  And sad the remembrance that slavery stains.
O thou who wert born in the cot of the peasant,
  But diest in languor in luxury's dome,
Our vision when absent--our glory, when present--
  Where thou art, O Liberty! there is my home.

Farewell to the land where in childhood I've wandered!
  In vain is she mighty, in vain, is she brave!
Unblest is the blood that for tyrants is squandered,
  And fame has no wreaths for the brow of the slave.
But hail to thee, Albion! who meet'st the commotion.
  Of Europe as calm as thy cliffs meet the foam!
With no bonds but the law, and no slave but the ocean,
  Hail, Temple of Liberty! thou art my home.

       *       *       *       *       *

Oh think, when a hero is sighing,
  What danger in such an adorer!
What woman can dream' of denying
  The hand that lays laurels before her?
No heart is so guarded around,
  But the smile of the victor will take it;
No bosom can slumber so sound,
  But the trumpet of glory will wake it.

Love sometimes is given to sleeping,
  And woe to the heart that allows him;
For oh, neither smiling nor weeping
  Has power at those moments to rouse him.
But tho' he was sleeping so fast,
  That the life almost seemed to forsake him,
Believe me, one soul-thrilling blast
  From the trumpet of glory would wake him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Orator Puff had two tones in his voice,
  The one squeaking thus, and the other down so!
In each sentence he uttered he gave you your choice,
  For one was B alt, and the rest G below.
Oh! oh, Orator Puff!
One voice for one orator's surely enough.

But he still talked away spite of coughs and of frowns,
So distracting all ears with his ups and his downs,
That a wag once on hearing the orator say,
"My voice is for war," asked him, "Which of them, pray?"
    Oh! oh! etc.

Reeling homewards one evening, top-heavy with gin,
And rehearsing his speech on the weight of the crown,
He tript near a sawpit, and tumbled right in,
"Sinking Fund," the last words as his noddle came down.
    Oh! oh, etc.

"Help! help!" he exclaimed, in his he and she tones,
"Help me out! help me out--I have broken my bones!"
"Help you out?" said a Paddy who passed, "what a bother!
Why, there's two of you there, can't you help one another?"
    Oh I oh! etc.








MISCELLANEOUS POEMS.






OCCASIONAL EPILOGUE.

SPOKEN BY MR. COBBY, IN THE CHARACTER OF VAPID, AFTER THE PLAY OF THE
DRAMATIST, AT THE KILKENNY THEATRE.


(_Entering as if to announce the Play_.)

Ladies and Gentlemen, on Monday night,
For the ninth time--oh accents of delight
To the poor author's ear, when _three times three_
With a full bumper crowns, his Comedy!
When, long by money, and the muse, forsaken,
He finds at length his jokes and boxes taken,
And sees his play-bill circulate--alas,
The only bill on which his name will pass!
Thus, Vapid, thus shall Thespian scrolls of fame
Thro' box and gallery waft your well-known name,
While critic eyes the happy cast shall con,
And learned ladies spell your _Dram. Person_.

'Tis said our worthy Manager[1]intends
To help my night, and _he_, ye know, has friends.
Friends, did I say? for fixing friends, or _parts_,
Engaging actors, or engaging hearts,
There's nothing like him! wits, at his request.
Are turned to fools, and dull dogs learn to jest;
Soldiers, for him, good "trembling cowards" make,
And beaus, turned clowns, look ugly for his sake;
For him even lawyers talk without a fee,
For him (oh friendship) _I_ act tragedy!
In short, like Orpheus, his persuasive tricks
Make _boars_ amusing, and put life in _sticks_.

With _such_ a manager we can't but please,
Tho' London sent us all her loud  O. P.'s,[2]
Let them come on, like snakes, all hiss and rattle,
Armed with a thousand fans, we'd  give them battle;
You, on our side, R. P.[3]upon our  banners,
Soon should we teach the saucy O. P.'s manners:
And show that, here--howe'er John Bull may doubt--
In all _our_ plays, the Riot-Act's cut out;
And, while we skim the cream of many a jest,
Your well-timed thunder never sours its zest.

Oh gently thus, when three short weeks are past,
At Shakespeare's altar,[4] shall we breathe our last;
And, ere this long-loved dome to ruin nods,
Die all, die nobly, die like demigods!


[1] The late Mr. Richard Power.

[2] The brief appellation by which these persons were distinguished who,
at the opening of the new theatre of Convent Garden, clamored for the
continuance of the old prices of admission.

[3] The initials of our manager's name.

[4] This alludes to a scenic representation then preparing for the last
night of the performances.






EXTRACT.

FROM A PROLOGUE WRITTEN AND SPOKEN BY THE AUTHOR, AT THE OPENING OF THE
KILKENNY THEATRE, OCTOBER, 1809.

       *        *       *       *       *

Yet, even here, tho' Fiction rules the hour,
There shine some genuine smiles, beyond her power;
And there are tears, too--tears that Memory sheds
Even o'er the feast that mimic fancy spreads,
When her heart misses one lamented guest,[1]
Whose eye so long threw light o'er all the rest!
There, there, indeed, the Muse forgets her task,
And drooping weeps behind Thalia's mask.

Forgive this gloom--forgive this joyless strain,
Too sad to welcome pleasure's smiling train.
But, meeting thus, our hearts will part the lighter,
As mist at dawn but makes the setting brighter;
Gay Epilogue will shine where Prologue fails--
As glow-worms keep their splendor for their tails.

I know not why--but time, methinks, hath past
More fleet than usual since we parted last.
It seems but like a dream of yesternight.
Whose charm still hangs, with fond, delaying light;
And, ere the memory lose one glowing hue
Of former joy, we come to kindle new.
Thus ever may the flying moments haste
With trackless foot along life's vulgar waste,
But deeply print and lingeringly move,
When thus they reach the sunny spots we love.
Oh yes, whatever be our gay career,
Let this be still the solstice of the year,
Where Pleasure's sun shall at its height remain,
And slowly sink to level life again.


[1] The late Mr. John Lyster, one of the oldest members and best actors of
the Kilkenny Theatrical Society.






THE SYLPH'S BALL.


A sylph, as bright as ever sported
  Her figure thro' the fields of air,
By an old swarthy Gnome was courted.
  And, strange to say, he won the fair.

The annals of the oldest witch
  A pair so sorted could not show,
But how refuse?--the Gnome was rich,
  The Rothschild of the world below;

And Sylphs, like other pretty creatures,
  Are told, betimes, they must consider
Love as an auctioneer of features,
  Who knocks them down to the best bidder.

Home she was taken to his Mine--
  A Palace paved with diamonds all--
And, proud as Lady Gnome to shine,
  Sent out her tickets for a ball.

The _lower_ world of course was there,
  And all the best; but of the _upper_
The sprinkling was but shy and rare,--
A few old Sylphids who loved supper.

As none yet knew the wondrous Lamp
Of DAVY, that renowned Aladdin,
And the Gnome's Halls exhaled a damp
Which accidents from fire were had in;

The chambers were supplied with light
By many strange but safe devices;
Large fire-flies, such as shine at night
Among the Orient's flowers and spices;--

Musical flint-mills--swiftly played
 By elfin hands--that, flashing round,
Like certain fire-eyed minstrel maids,
Gave out at once both light and sound.

Bologna stones that drink the sun;
 And water from that Indian sea,
Whose waves at night like wildfire run--
Corked up in crystal carefully.

Glow-worms that round the tiny dishes
Like little light-houses, were set up;
And pretty phosphorescent fishes
 That by their own gay light were eat up.

'Mong the few guests from Ether came
That wicked Sylph whom Love we call--
My Lady knew him but by name,
 My Lord, her husband, not at all.

Some prudent Gnomes, 'tis said, apprised
That he was coming, and, no doubt
Alarmed about his torch, advised
 He should by all means be kept out.

But others disapproved this plan,
 And by his flame tho' somewhat frighted,
Thought Love too much a gentleman
In such a dangerous place to light it.

However, _there_ he was--and dancing
 With the fair Sylph, light as a feather;
They looked like two fresh sunbeams glancing
At daybreak down to earth together.

And all had gone off safe and well,
 But for that plaguy torch whose light,
Though not _yet_ kindled--who could tell
How soon, how devilishly, it _might_?

And so it chanced--which, in those dark
 And fireless halls was quite amazing;
Did we not know how small a spark
 Can set the torch of Love a-blazing.

Whether it came (when close entangled
 In the gay waltz) from her bright eyes,
Or from the _lucciole_, that spangled
 Her locks of jet--is all surmise;

But certain 'tis the ethereal girl
 _Did_ drop a spark at some odd turning,
Which by the waltz's windy whirl
 Was fanned up into actual burning.

Oh for that Lamp's metallic gauze,
 That curtain of protecting wire,
Which DAVY delicately draws
 Around illicit, dangerous fire!--

The wall he sets 'twixt Flame and Air,
  (Like that which barred young Thisbe's bliss,)
Thro' whose small holes this dangerous pair
  May see each other but not kiss.

At first the torch looked rather bluely,--
  A sign, they say, that no good boded--
Then quick the gas became unruly.
  And, crack! the ball-room all exploded.

Sylphs, gnomes, and fiddlers mixt together,
  With all their aunts, sons, cousins, nieces,
Like butterflies in stormy weather,
  Were blown--legs, wings, and tails--to pieces!

While, mid these victims of the torch,
  The Sylph, alas, too, bore her part--
Found lying with a livid scorch
  As if from lightning o'er her heart!

       *       *       *       *       *

"Well done"--a laughing Goblin said--
  Escaping from this gaseous strife--
"'Tis not the _first_ time Love has made
  "A _blow-up_ in connubial life!"






REMONSTRANCE.


_After a Conversation with Lord John Russell, in which he had intimated
some Idea of giving up all political Pursuits. _


What! _thou_, with thy genius, thy youth, and thy name--
  Thou, born of a Russell--whose instinct to run
The accustomed career of thy sires, is the same
  As the eaglet's, to soar with his eyes on the sun!

Whose nobility comes to thee, stampt with a seal,
  Far, far more ennobling than monarch e'er set;
With the blood of thy race, offered up for the weal
  Of a nation that swears by that martyrdom yet!

Shalt _thou_ be faint-hearted and turn from the strife,
  From the mighty arena, where all that is grand
And devoted and pure and adorning in life,
  'Tis for high-thoughted spirits like thine to command?

Oh no, never dream it--while good men despair
  Between tyrants and traitors, and timid men bow,
Never think for an instant thy country can spare
  Such a light from her darkening horizon as thou.

With a spirit, as meek as the gentlest of those
  Who in life's sunny valley lie sheltered and warm;
Yet bold and heroic as ever yet rose
  To the top cliffs of Fortune and breasted her storm;

With an ardor for liberty fresh as in youth
  It first kindles the bard and gives life to his lyre;
Yet mellowed, even now, by that mildness of truth
  Which tempers but chills not the patriot fire;

With an eloquence--not like those rills from a height,
  Which sparkle and foam and in vapor are o'er;
But a current that works out its way into light
  Thro' the filtering recesses of thought and of lore.

Thus gifted, thou never canst sleep in the shade;
  If the stirrings of Genius, the music of fame,
And the charms of thy cause have not power to persuade,
  Yet think how to Freedom thou'rt pledged by thy Name.

Like the boughs of that laurel by Delphi's decree
  Set apart for the Fane and its service divine,
So the branches that spring from the old Russell tree
  Are by Liberty _claimed_ for the use of her Shrine.






MY BIRTH-DAY.


"My birth-day"--what a different sound
  That word had in my youthful ears!
And how, each time the day comes round,
  Less and less white its mark appears!

"When first our scanty years are told,
It seems like pastime to grow old;
And as Youth counts the shining links
  That Time around him binds so fast,
Pleased with the task, he little thinks
  How hard that chain will press at last.
Vain was the man, and false as vain,
  Who said--"were he ordained to run
"His long career of life again,
  "He would do all that he _had_ done."--
Ah, 'tis not thus the voice that dwells
  In sober birth-days speaks to me;
Far otherwise--of time it tells,
  Lavished unwisely, carelessly:
Of counsel mockt; of talents made
  Haply for high and pure designs,
But oft, like Israel's incense, laid
  Upon unholy, earthly shrines;
Of nursing many a wrong desire,
  Of wandering after Love too far,
And taking every meteor fire
  That crost my pathway, for his star.--
All this it tells, and, could I trace
  The imperfect picture o'er again.
With power to add, retouch, efface
  The lights and shades, the joy and pain,
How little of the past would stay!
How quickly all should melt away--
All--but that Freedom of the Mind
  Which hath been more than wealth to me;
Those friendships, in my boyhood twined,
  And kept till now unchangingly,
And that dear home, that saving ark,
  Where Love's true light at last I've found,
Cheering within, when all grows dark
  And comfortless and stormy round!






FANCY.


The more I've viewed this world, the more I've found,
That filled as 'tis with scenes and creatures rare,
Fancy commands within her own bright round
  A world of scenes and creatures far more fair.
Nor is it that her power can call up there
  A single charm, that's not from Nature won,--
No more than rainbows in their pride can wear
  A single tint unborrowed from the sun;
But 'tis the mental medium; it shines thro',
That lends to Beauty all its charm and hue;
As the same light that o'er the level lake
  One dull monotony of lustre flings,
Will, entering in the rounded raindrop, make
Colors as gay as those on angels' wings!






SONG.

FANNY, DEAREST.


Yes! had I leisure to sigh and mourn,
  Fanny dearest, for thee I'd sigh;
And every smile on my cheek should turn
  To tears when thou art nigh.
But between love and wine and sleep,
  So busy a life I live,
That even the time it would take to weep
  Is more than my heart can give.
Then wish me not to despair and pine,
  Fanny, dearest of all the dears!
The Love that's ordered to bathe in wine,
  Would be sure to take cold in tears.

Reflected bright in this heart of mine,
  Fanny dearest, thy image lies;
But ah! the mirror would cease to shine,
  If dimmed too often with sighs.
They lose the half of beauty's light,
  Who view it thro' sorrow's tear;
And 'tis but to see thee truly bright
  That I keep my eye-beams clear.
Then wait no longer till tears shall flow--

  Fanny, dearest! the hope is vain;
If sunshine cannot dissolve thy snow,
  I shall never attempt it with rain.








TRANSLATIONS FROM CATULLUS.






CARM. 70.

    _dicebas quondam, etc_.

TO LESBIA.


Thou told'st me, in our days of love,
  That I had all that heart of thine;
That, even to share the couch of Jove,
  Thou wouldst not, Lesbia, part from mine.

How purely wert thou worshipt then!
  Not with the vague and vulgar fires
Which Beauty wakes in soulless men,--
  But loved, as children by their sires.

That flattering dream, alas, is o'er;--
  I know thee now--and tho' these eyes
Doat on thee wildly as before,
  Yet, even in doating, I despise.

Yes, sorceress--mad as it may seem--
  With all thy craft, such spells adorn thee,
That passion even outlives esteem.
  And I at once adore--and scorn thee.






CARM. II.


    _pauca nunciate meae puellae_.


Comrades and friends! with whom, where'er
  The fates have willed thro' life I've roved,
Now speed ye home, and with you bear
  These bitter words to her I've loved.

Tell her from fool to fool to run,
  Where'er her vain caprice may call;
Of all her dupes not loving one,
  But ruining and maddening all.

Bid her forget--what now is past--
  Our once dear love, whose rain lies
Like a fair flower, the meadow's last.
  Which feels the ploughshare's edge and dies!






CARM. 29.


    _peninsularum Sirmio, insularumque ocelle_.


Sweet Sirmio! thou, the very eye
  Of all peninsulas and isles,
That in our lakes of silver lie,
  Or sleep enwreathed by Neptune's smiles--

How gladly back to thee I fly!
  Still doubting, asking--_can_ it be
That I have left Bithynia's sky,
  And gaze in safety upon thee?

Oh! what is happier than to find
  Our hearts at ease, our perils past;
When, anxious long, the lightened mind
  Lays down its load of care at last:

When tired with toil o'er land and deep,
  Again we tread the welcome floor
Of our own home, and sink to sleep
  On the long-wished-for bed once more.

This, this it is that pays alone
  The ills of all life's former track.--
Shine out, my beautiful, my own
  Sweet Sirmio, greet thy master back.

And thou, fair Lake, whose water quaffs
  The light of heaven like Lydia's sea,
Rejoice, rejoice--let all that laughs
  Abroad, at home, laugh out for me!






TIBULLUS TO SULPICIA.


    _nulla tuum nobis subducet femina lectum, etc.,
    Lib. iv. Carm. 13_.


"Never shall woman's smile have power
  "To win me from those gentle charms!"--
Thus swore I, in that happy hour,
  When Love first gave thee to my arms.

And still alone thou charm'st my sight--
  Still, tho' our city proudly shine
With forms and faces, fair and bright,
  I see none fair or bright but thine.

Would thou wert fair for only me,
  And couldst no heart but mine allure!--
To all men else unpleasing be,
  So shall I feel my prize secure.

Oh, love like mine ne'er wants the zest
  Of others' envy, others' praise;
But, in its silence safely blest,
  Broods o'er a bliss it ne'er betrays.

Charm of my life! by whose sweet power
  All cares are husht, all ills subdued--
My light in even the darkest hour,
  My crowd in deepest solitude!

No, not tho' heaven itself sent down
  Some maid of more than heavenly charms,
With bliss undreamt thy bard to crown,
  Would he for her forsake those arms!






IMITATION.

FROM THE FRENCH.


With women and apples both Paris and Adam
  Made mischief enough in their day:--
God be praised that the fate of mankind, my dear Madam,
  Depends not on _us_, the same way.
For, weak as I am with temptation to grapple,
  The world would have doubly to rue thee:

Like Adam, I'd gladly take _from_ thee the apple,
  Like Paris, at once give it _to_ thee.






INVITATION TO DINNER.

ADDRESSED TO LORD LANSDOWNE.

September, 1818.


Some think we bards have nothing real;
  That poets live among the stars so,
Their very dinners are ideal,--
  (And, heaven knows, too oft they _are_ so,)--
For instance, that we have, instead
  Of vulgar chops and stews and hashes,
First course--a Phoenix, at the head.
  Done in its own celestial ashes;
At foot, a cygnet which kept singing
All the time its neck was wringing.
Side dishes, thus--Minerva's owl,
Or any such like learned fowl:
Doves, such as heaven's poulterer gets,
When Cupid shoots his mother's pets.
Larks stewed in Morning's roseate breath,
  Or roasted by a sunbeam's splendor;
And nightingales, berhymed to death--
  Like young pigs whipt to make them tender.

Such fare may suit those bards, who are able
To banquet at Duke Humphrey's table;
But as for me, who've long been taught
  To eat and drink like other people;
And can put up with mutton, bought
  Where Bromham[1] rears its ancient steeple--
If Lansdowne will consent to share
My humble feast, tho' rude the fare,
Yet, seasoned by that salt he brings
From Attica's salinest springs,
'Twill turn to dainties;--while the cup,
Beneath his influence brightening up,
Like that of Baucis, touched by Jove,
Will sparkle fit for gods above!


[1] A picturesque village in sight of my cottage, and from which it is
separated out by a small verdant valley.






VERSES TO THE POET CRABBE'S INKSTAND.[1]

(WRITTEN MAY, 1832.)


All, as he left it!--even the pen,
  So lately at that mind's command,
Carelessly lying, as if then
  Just fallen from his gifted hand.

Have we then lost him? scarce an hour,
  A little hour, seems to have past,
Since Life and Inspiration's power
  Around that relic breathed their last.

Ah, powerless now--like talisman
  Found in some vanished wizard's halls,
Whose mighty charm with him began,
  Whose charm with him extinguisht falls.

Yet, tho', alas! the gifts that shone
  Around that pen's exploring track,
Be now, with its great master, gone,
  Nor living hand can call them back;

Who does not feel, while thus his eyes
  Rest on the enchanter's broken wand,
Each earth-born spell it worked arise
  Before him in succession grand?

Grand, from the Truth that reigns o'er all;
  The unshrinking truth that lets her light
Thro' Life's low, dark, interior fall,
  Opening the whole, severely bright:

Yet softening, as she frowns along,
  O'er scenes which angels weep to see--
Where Truth herself half veils the Wrong,
  In pity of the Misery.

True bard!--and simple, as the race
  Of true-born poets ever are,
When, stooping from their starry place,
  They're children near, tho' gods afar.

How freshly doth my mind recall,
  'Mong the few days I've known with thee,
One that, most buoyantly of all,
  Floats in the wake of memory;[2]

When he, the poet, doubly graced,
  In life, as in his perfect strain,
With that pure, mellowing power of Taste,
  Without which Fancy shines in vain;

Who in his page will leave behind,
  Pregnant with genius tho' it be,
But half the treasures of a mind,
  Where Sense o'er all holds mastery:--

Friend of long years! of friendship tried
  Thro' many a bright and dark event;
In doubts, my judge--in taste, my guide--
  In all, my stay and ornament!

He, too, was of our feast that day,
  And all were guests of one whose hand
Hath shed a new and deathless ray
  Around the lyre of this great land;

In whose sea-odes--as in those shells
  Where Ocean's voice of majesty
Seems still to sound--immortal dwells
  Old Albion's Spirit of the Sea.

Such was our host; and tho', since then,
  Slight clouds have risen 'twixt him and me,
Who would not grasp such hand again,
  Stretched forth again in amity?

Who can, in this short life, afford
  To let such mists a moment stay,
When thus one frank, atoning word,
  Like sunshine, melts them all away?

Bright was our board that day--tho' _one_
  Unworthy brother there had place;
As 'mong the horses of the Sun,
  One was, they say, of earthly race.

Yet, _next_ to Genius is the power
  Of feeling where true Genius lies;
And there was light around that hour
  Such as, in memory, never dies;

Light which comes o'er me as I gaze,
  Thou Relic of the Dead, on thee,
Like all such dreams of vanisht days,
  Brightly, indeed--but mournfully!


[1] Soon after Mr. Crabbe's death, the sons of that gentleman did me the
honor of presenting to me the inkstand, pencil, etc., which their
distinguished father had long been in the habit of using.

[2] The lines that follow allude to a day passed in company with Mr.
Crabbe, many years since, when a party, consisting only of Mr. Rogers, Mr.
Crabbe, and the author of these verses, had the pleasure of dining with
Mr. Thomas Campbell, at his house at Sydenham.






TO CAROLINE, VISCOUNTESS VALLETORT.

WRITTEN AT LACOCK ABBEY, JANUARY, 1832.


When I would sing thy beauty's light,
Such various forms, and all so bright,
I've seen thee, from thy childhood, wear,
I know not which to call most fair,
Nor 'mong the countless charms that spring
For ever round thee, _which_ to sing.

  When I would paint thee as thou _art_,
Then all thou _wert_ comes o'er my heart--
The graceful child in Beauty's dawn
Within the nursery's shade withdrawn,
Or peeping out--like a young moon
Upon a world 'twill brighten soon.
Then next in girlhood's blushing hour,
As from thy own loved Abbey-tower
I've seen thee look, all radiant, down,
With smiles that to the hoary frown
Of centuries round thee lent a ray,
Chasing even Age's gloom away;--
Or in the world's resplendent throng,
As I have markt thee glide along,
Among the crowds of fair and great
A spirit, pure and separate,
To which even Admiration's eye
Was fearful to approach too nigh;--
A creature circled by a spell
Within which nothing wrong could dwell;
And fresh and clear as from the source.
Holding through life her limpid course,
Like Arethusa thro' the sea,
Stealing in fountain purity.

  Now, too, another change of light!
As noble bride, still meekly bright
Thou bring'st thy Lord a dower above
All earthly price, pure woman's love;
And showd'st what lustre Rank receives,
When with his proud Corinthian leaves
Her rose this high-bred Beauty weaves.

  Wonder not if, where all's so fair,
To choose were more than bard can dare;
Wonder not if, while every scene
I've watched thee thro' so bright hath been,
The enamored muse should, in her quest
Of beauty, know not where to rest,
But, dazzled, at thy feet thus fall,
Hailing thee beautiful in all!






A SPECULATION.


Of all speculations the market holds forth,
  The best that I know for a lover of pelf,
Is to buy Marcus up, at the price he is worth,
  And then sell him at that which he sets on himself.






TO MY MOTHER.

WRITTEN IN A POCKET BOOK, 1822.


They tell us of an Indian tree,
  Which, howsoe'er the sun and sky
May tempt its boughs to wander free,
  And shoot and blossom wide and high,
Far better loves to bend its arms
  Downward again to that dear earth,
From which the life that, fills and warms
  Its grateful being, first had birth.
'Tis thus, tho' wooed by flattering friends,
  And fed with fame (_if_ fame it be)
This heart, my own dear mother, bends,
  With love's true instinct, back to thee!






LOVE AND HYMEN.


Love had a fever--ne'er could close
  His little eyes till day was breaking;
And wild and strange enough, Heaven knows,
  The things he raved about while waking.

To let him pine so were a sin;--
  One to whom all the world's a debtor--
So Doctor Hymen was called in,
  And Love that night slept rather better.

Next day the case gave further hope yet,
  Tho' still some ugly fever latent;--
"Dose, as before"--a gentle opiate.
  For which old Hymen has a patent.

After a month of daily call,
  So fast the dose went on restoring,
That Love, who first ne'er slept at all,
  Now took, the rogue! to downright snoring.






LINES ON THE ENTRY OF THE AUSTRIANS INTO NAPLES, 1821.


    _carbone notati_.


Ay--down to the dust with them, slaves as they are,
  From this hour let the blood in their dastardly veins,
That shrunk at the first touch of Liberty's war,
  Be wasted for tyrants, or stagnate in chains.

On, on like a cloud, thro' their beautiful vales,
  Ye locusts of tyranny, blasting them o'er--
Fill, fill up their wide sunny waters, ye sails
  From each slave-mart of Europe and shadow their shore!

Let their fate be a mock-word--let men of all lands
  Laugh out with a scorn that shall ring to the poles,
When each sword that the cowards let fall from their hands
  Shall be forged into fetters to enter their souls.

And deep, and more deep, as the iron is driven,
  Base slaves! let the whet of their agony be,
To think--as the Doomed often think of that heaven
  They had once within reach--that they _might_ have been free.

Oh shame! when there was not a bosom whose heat
  Ever rose 'bove the _zero_ of Castlereagh's heart.
That did not, like echo, your war-hymn repeat,
  And send all its prayers with your Liberty's start;

When the world stood in hope--when a spirit that breathed
  The fresh air of the olden time whispered about;
And the swords of all Italy, halfway unsheathed,
  But waited one conquering cry to flash out!

When around you the shades of your Mighty in fame,
  FILICAJAS and PETRARCHS, seemed bursting to view,
And their words and their warnings, like tongues of bright flame
  Over Freedom's apostles, fell kindling on you!

Oh shame! that in such a proud moment of life
  Worth the history of ages, when, had you but hurled
One bolt at your tyrant invader, that strife
  Between freemen and tyrants had spread thro' the world--

That then--oh! disgrace upon manhood--even then,
  You should falter, should cling to your pitiful breath;
Cower down into beasts, when you might have stood men,
  And prefer the slave's life of prostration to death.

It is strange, it is dreadful:--shout, Tyranny, shout
  Thro' your dungeons and palaces, "Freedom is o'er;"--
If there lingers one spark of her light, tread it out,
  And return to your empire of darkness once more.

For if _such_ are the braggarts that claim to be free,
  Come, Despot of Russia, thy feet let me kiss;
Far nobler to live the brute bondman of thee,
  Than to sully even chains by a struggle like this!






SCEPTICISM.


Ere Psyche drank the cup that shed
  Immortal Life into her soul,
Some evil spirit poured, 'tis said,
  One drop of Doubt into the bowl--

Which, mingling darkly with the stream,
  To Psyche's lips--she knew not why--
Made even that blessed nectar seem
  As tho' its sweetness soon would die.

Oft, in the very arms of Love,
  A chill came o'er her heart--a fear
That Death might, even yet, remove
  Her spirit from that happy sphere.

"Those sunny ringlets," she exclaimed.
  Twining them round her snowy fingers;
"That forehead, where a light unnamed,
  "Unknown on earth, for ever lingers;

"Those lips, thro' which I feel the breath
  "Of Heaven itself, whene'er they sever--
"Say, are they mine, beyond all death,
  "My own, hereafter, and for ever?

"Smile not--I know that starry brow,
  "Those ringlets, and bright lips of thine,
"Will always shine, as they do now--
  "But shall _I_ live to see them shine?"

In vain did Love say, "Turn thine eyes
  "On all that sparkles round thee here--
"Thou'rt now in heaven where nothing dies,
  "And in these arms--what _canst_ thou fear?"

In vain--the fatal drop, that stole
  Into that cup's immortal treasure,
Had lodged its bitter near her soul.
  And gave a tinge to every pleasure.

And, tho' there ne'er was transport given
  Like Psyche's with that radiant boy,
Here is the only face in heaven,
  That wears a cloud amid its joy.






A JOKE VERSIFIED.


"Come, come," said Tom's father, "at your time of life,
  "There's no longer excuse for thus playing the rake--
"It is time you should think, boy, of taking a wife"--
  "Why, so it is, father--whose wife shall I take?"






ON THE DEATH OF A FRIEND.


Pure as the mantle, which, o'er him who stood
  By Jordan's stream, descended from the sky,
Is that remembrance which the wise and good
  Leave in the hearts that love them, when they die.

So pure, so precious shall the memory be,
Bequeathed, in dying, to our souls by thee--
So shall the love we bore thee, cherisht warm
  Within our souls thro' grief and pain and strife,
Be, like Elisha's cruse, a holy charm,
  Wherewith to "heal the waters" of this life!






TO JAMES CORRY, ESQ.

ON HIS MAKING ME A PRESENT OF A WINE STRAINER.

BRIGHTON, JUNE, 1825.


This life, dear Corry, who can doubt?--
  Resembles much friend Ewart's[1] wine,
When _first_ the rosy drops come out,
  How beautiful, how clear they shine!
And thus awhile they keep their tint,
  So free from even a shade with some,
That they would smile, did you but hint,
  That darker drops would _ever_ come.

But soon the ruby tide runs short,
  Each minute makes the sad truth plainer,
Till life, like old and crusty port,
  When near its close, requires a strainer.

_This_ friendship can alone confer,
  Alone can teach the drops to pass,
If not as bright as _once_ they were,
  At least unclouded, thro' the glass.

Nor, Corry, could a boon be mine.
  Of which this heart were fonder, vainer,
Than thus, if life grow like old wine,
  To have _thy_ friendship for its strainer.


[1] A wine-merchant.






FRAGMENT OF A CHARACTER.


Here lies Factotum Ned at last;
  Long as he breathed the vital air,
Nothing throughout all Europe past
  In which Ned hadn't some small share.

Whoe'er was _in_, whoe'er was _out_,
  Whatever statesmen did or said,
If not exactly brought about,
  'Twas all, at least, contrived by Ned.

With Nap, if Russia went to war,
  'Twas owing, under Providence,
To certain hints Ned gave the Tsar--
  (Vide his pamphlet--price, sixpence.)

If France was beat at Waterloo--
  As all but Frenchmen think she was--
To Ned, as Wellington well knew,
  Was owing half that day's applause.

Then for his news--no envoy's bag
  E'er past so many secrets thro' it;
Scarcely a telegraph could wag
  Its wooden finger, but Ned knew it.

Such tales he had of foreign plots,
  With foreign names, one's ear to buzz in!
From Russia, _shefs_ and _ofs_ in lots,
  From Poland, _owskis_ by the dozen.

When George, alarmed for England's creed,
  Turned out the last Whig ministry,
And men asked--who advised the deed?
  Ned modestly confest 'twas he.

For tho', by some unlucky miss,
  He had not downright _seen_ the King,
He sent such hints thro' Viscount _This_,
  To Marquis _That_, as clenched the thing.

The same it was in science, arts,
  The Drama, Books, MS. and printed--
Kean learned from Ned his cleverest parts,
  And Scott's last work by him was hinted.

Childe Harold in the proofs he read,
  And, here and there infused some soul in't--
Nay, Davy's Lamp, till seen by Ned,
  Had--odd enough--an awkward hole in't.

'Twas thus, all-doing and all-knowing,
  Wit, statesman, boxer, chymist, singer,
Whatever was the best pie going,
  In _that_ Ned--trust him--had his finger.

       *        *        *        *        *






WHAT SHALL I SING THEE?

TO ----.


What shall I sing thee? Shall I tell
Of that bright hour, remembered well
As tho' it shone but yesterday,

When loitering idly in the ray
Of a spring sun I heard o'er-head,
My name as by some spirit said,
And, looking up, saw two bright eyes
  Above me from a casement shine,
Dazzling my mind with such surprise
  As they, who sail beyond the Line,
Feel when new stars above them rise;--
And it was thine, the voice that spoke,
  Like Ariel's, in the mid-air then;
And thine the eye whose lustre broke--
  Never to be forgot again!

What shall I sing thee? Shall I weave
A song of that sweet summer-eve,
(Summer, of which the sunniest part
Was that we, each, had in the heart,)
When thou and I, and one like thee,
  In life and beauty, to the sound
Of our own breathless minstrelsy.
  Danced till the sunlight faded round,
Ourselves the whole ideal Ball,
Lights, music, company, and all?

Oh, 'tis not in the languid strain
  Of lute like mine, whose day is past,
To call up even a dream again
  Of the fresh light those moments cast.






COUNTRY DANCE AND QUADRILLE.


One night the nymph called country dance--
  (Whom folks, of late, have used so ill,
Preferring a coquette from France,
  That mincing thing, _Mamselle_ quadrille)--

Having been chased from London down
  To that most humble haunt of all
She used to grace--a Country Town--
  Went smiling to the New-Year's Ball.

"Here, here, at least," she cried, tho' driven
  "From London's gay and shining tracks--
"Tho', like a Peri cast from heaven,
  "I've lost, for ever lost, Almack's--

"Tho' not a London Miss alive
  "Would now for her acquaintance own me;
"And spinsters, even, of forty-five,
  "Upon their honors ne'er have known me;

"Here, here, at least, I triumph still,
  "And--spite of some few dandy Lancers.
"Who vainly try to preach Quadrille--
  "See naught but _true-blue_ Country Dancers,

"Here still I reign, and, fresh in charms,
  "My throne, like Magna Charta, raise
"'Mong sturdy, free-born legs and arms,
  "That scorn the threatened _chaine anglaise_."

'Twas thus she said, as mid the din
  Of footmen, and the town sedan,
She lighted at the King's Head Inn,
  And up the stairs triumphant ran.

The Squires and their Squiresses all,
  With young Squirinas, just _come out_,
And my Lord's daughters from the Hall,
  (Quadrillers in their hearts no doubt,)--

All these, as light she tript upstairs,
  Were in the cloak-room seen assembling--
When, hark! some new outlandish airs,
  From the First Fiddle, set her trembling.

She stops--she listens--_can_ it be?
  Alas, in vain her ears would 'scape it--
It _is "Di tanti palpiti"_
  As plain as English bow can scrape it.

"Courage!" however--in she goes,
  With her best, sweeping country grace;
When, ah too true, her worst of foes,
  Quadrille, there meets her, face to face.

Oh for the lyre, or violin,
  Or kit of that gay Muse, Terpsichore,
To sing the rage these nymphs were in,
  Their looks and language, airs and trickery.

There stood Quadrille, with cat-like face
  (The beau-ideal of French beauty),
A band-box thing, all art and lace
  Down from her nose-tip to her shoe-tie.

Her flounces, fresh from _Victorine_--
  From _Hippolyte_, her rouge and hair--
Her poetry, from _Lamartine_--
  Her morals, from--the Lord knows where.

And, when she danced--so slidingly,
  So near the ground she plied her art,
You'd swear her mother-earth and she
  Had made a compact ne'er to part.

Her face too, all the while, sedate,
  No signs of life or motion showing.
Like a bright _pendule's_ dial-plate--
  So still, you'd hardly think 'twas _going_.

Full fronting her stood Country Dance--
  A fresh, frank nymph, whom you would know
For English, at a single glance--
  English all o'er, from top to toe.

A little _gauche_, 'tis fair to own,
  And rather given to skips and bounces;
Endangering thereby many a gown,
  And playing, oft, the devil with flounces.

Unlike _Mamselle_--who would prefer
  (As morally a lesser ill)
A thousand flaws of character,
  To one vile rumple of a frill.

No rouge did She of Albion wear;
  Let her but run that two-heat race
She calls a _Set_, not Dian e'er
  Came rosier from the woodland chase.

Such was the nymph, whose soul had in't
  Such anger now--whose eyes of blue
(Eyes of that bright, victorious tint,
  Which English maids call "Waterloo")--

Like summer lightnings, in the dusk
  Of a warm evening, flashing broke.
While--to the tune of "Money Musk,"[1]
  Which struck up now--she proudly spoke--

"Heard you that strain--that joyous strain?
  "'Twas such as England loved to hear,
"Ere thou and all thy frippery train,
  "Corrupted both her foot and ear--

"Ere Waltz, that rake from foreign lands,
  "Presumed, in sight of all beholders,
"To lay his rude, licentious hands
  "On virtuous English backs and shoulders--

"Ere times and morals both grew bad,
  "And, yet unfleeced by funding block-heads,
"Happy John Bull not only _had_,
  "But danced to, 'Money in both pockets.'

"Alas, the change!--Oh, Londonderry,
  "Where is the land could 'scape disasters,
"With _such_ a Foreign Secretary,
  "Aided by Foreign Dancing Masters?

"Woe to ye, men of ships and shops!
  "Rulers of day-books and of waves!
"Quadrilled, on one side, into fops,
  "And drilled, on t'other, into slaves!

"Ye, too, ye lovely victims, seen,
  "Like pigeons, trussed for exhibition,
"With elbows, _ la crapaudine_,
  "And feet, in--God knows what position;

"Hemmed in by watchful chaperons,
  "Inspectors of your airs and graces,
"Who intercept all whispered tones,
  "And read your telegraphic faces;

"Unable with the youth adored,
  "In that grim _cordon_ of Mammas,
"To interchange one tender word,
  "Tho' whispered but in _queue-de-chats_.

"Ah did you know how blest we ranged,
  "Ere vile Quadrille usurpt the fiddle--
"What looks in _setting_ were exchanged,
  "What tender words in _down the middle_;

"How many a couple, like the wind,
  "Which nothing in its course controls,
Left time and chaperons far behind,
  "And gave a loose to legs and souls;

How matrimony throve--ere stopt
  "By this cold, silent, foot-coquetting--
"How charmingly one's partner propt
"The important question in _poussetteing_.

"While now, alas--no sly advances--
  "No marriage hints--all goes on badly--
"'Twixt Parson Malthus and French Dances,
  "We, girls, are at a discount sadly.

"Sir William Scott (now Baron Stowell)
  "Declares not half so much is made
"By Licences--and he must know well--
  "Since vile Quadrilling spoiled the trade."

She ceased--tears fell from every Miss--
  She now had touched the true pathetic:--
One such authentic fact as this,
  Is worth whole volumes theoretic.

Instant the cry was "Country Dance!"
  And the maid saw with brightening face,
The Steward of the night advance,
  And lead her to her birthright place.

The fiddles, which awhile had ceased,
  Now tuned again their summons sweet,
And, for one happy night, at least,
  Old England's triumph was complete.


[1] An old English country dance.






GAZEL.


Haste, Maami, the spring is nigh;
  Already, in the unopened flowers
That sleep around us, Fancy's eye
  Can see the blush of future bowers;
And joy it brings to thee and me,
My own beloved Maami!

The streamlet frozen on its way,
  To feed the marble Founts of Kings,
Now, loosened by the vernal ray,
  Upon its path exulting springs--
As doth this bounding heart to thee,
My ever blissful Maami!

Such bright hours were not made to stay;
  Enough if they awhile remain,
Like Irem's bowers, that fade away.
  From time to time, and come again.
And life shall all one Irem be
For us, my gentle Maami.

O haste, for this impatient heart,
  Is like the rose in Yemen's vale,
That rends its inmost leaves apart
  With passion for the nightingale;
So languishes this soul for thee,
My bright and blushing Maami!






LINES ON THE DEATH OF JOSEPH ATKINSON, ESQ., OF DUBLIN.


If ever life was prosperously cast,
  If ever life was like the lengthened flow
Of some sweet music, sweetness to the last,
  'Twas his who, mourned by many, sleeps below.

The sunny temper, bright where all is strife.
  The simple heart above all worldly wiles;
Light wit that plays along the calm of life,
  And stirs its languid surface into smiles;

Pure charity that comes not in a shower,
  Sudden and loud, oppressing what it feeds,
But, like the dew, with gradual silent power,
  Felt in the bloom it leaves along the meads;

The happy grateful spirit, that improves
  And brightens every gift by fortune given;
That, wander where it will with those it loves,
  Makes every place a home, and home a heaven:

All these were his.--Oh, thou who read'st this stone,
  When for thyself, thy children, to the sky
Thou humbly prayest, ask this boon alone,
  That ye like him may live, like him may die!






GENIUS AND CRITICISM.


    _scripsit quidem fata, sed sequitur_.
    SENECA.


Of old, the Sultan Genius reigned,
  As Nature meant, supreme alone;
With mind unchekt, and hands unchained,
  His views, his conquests were his own.

But power like his, that digs its grave
  With its own sceptre, could not last;
So Genius' self became the slave
  Of laws that Genius' self had past.

As Jove, who forged the chain of Fate,
  Was, ever after, doomed to wear it:
His nods, his struggles all too late--
  "_Qui semel jussit, semper paret_."

To check young Genius' proud career,
  The slaves who now his throne invaded,
Made Criticism his prime Vizir,
  And from that hour his glories faded.

Tied down in Legislation's school,
  Afraid of even his own ambition,
His very victories were by rule,
  And he was great but by permission.

His most heroic deeds--the same,
  That dazzled, when spontaneous actions--
Now, done by law, seemed cold and tame,
  And shorn of all their first attractions.

If he but stirred to take the air,
  Instant, the Vizir's Council sat--
"Good Lord, your Highness can't go there--
"Bless me, your Highness can't do that."

If, loving pomp, he chose to buy
  Rich jewels for his diadem,
"The taste was bad, the price was high--
  "A flower were simpler than a gem."

To please them if he took to flowers--
  "What trifling, what unmeaning things!
"Fit for a woman's toilet hours,
  "But not at all the style for Kings."

If, fond of his domestic sphere,
  He played no more the rambling comet--
"A dull, good sort of man, 'twas clear,
  "But, as for great or brave, far from it."

Did he then look o'er distant oceans,
  For realms more worthy to enthrone him?--
"Saint Aristotle, what wild notions!
  "Serve a '_ne exeat regno_' on him."

At length, their last and worst to do,
They round him placed a guard of watchmen,
Reviewers, knaves in brown, or blue
Turned up with yellow--chiefly Scotchmen;

To dog his footsteps all about
  Like those in Longwood's prison grounds,
Who at Napoleon's heels rode out,
  For fear the Conqueror should break bounds.

Oh for some Champion of his power,
  Some _Ultra_ spirit, to set free,
As erst in Shakespeare's sovereign hour,
  The thunders of his Royalty!--

To vindicate his ancient line,
  The first, the true, the only one,
Of Right eternal and divine,
  That rules beneath the blessed sun.






TO LADY JERSEY.

ON BEING ASKED TO WRITE SOMETHING IN HER ALBUM.

Written at Middleton.


Oh albums, albums, how I dread
  Your everlasting scrap and scrawl!
How often wish that from the dead
Old Omar would pop forth his head,
  And make a bonfire of you all!

So might I 'scape the spinster band,
  The blushless blues, who, day and night,
Like duns in doorways, take their stand,
To waylay bards, with book in hand,
  Crying for ever, "Write, sir, write!"

So might I shun the shame and pain,
  That o'er me at this instant come,
When Beauty, seeking Wit in vain,
Knocks at the portal of my brain,
  And gets, for answer, "Not at home!"

_November, 1828_.






TO THE SAME.

ON LOOKING THROUGH HER ALBUM.


No wonder bards, both high and low,
  From Byron down to ***** and me,
Should seek the fame which all bestow
  On him whose task is praising thee.

Let but the theme be Jersey's eyes,
  At once all errors are forgiven;
As even old Sternhold still we prize,
  Because, tho' dull, he sings of heaven.






AT NIGHT.[1]


At night, when all is still around.
How sweet to hear the distant sound
  Of footstep, coming soft and light!
What pleasure in the anxious beat,
With which the bosom flies to meet
  That foot that comes so soft at night!

And then, at night, how sweet to say
"'Tis late, my love!" and chide delay,
  Tho' still the western clouds are bright;
Oh! happy, too, the silent press,
The eloquence of mute caress.
  With those we love exchanged at night!


[1] These lines allude to a curious lamp, which has for its device a
Cupid, with the words "at night" written over him.






TO LADY HOLLAND.

ON NAPOLEON'S LEGACY OP A SNUFF-BOX.


Gift of the Hero, on his dying day,
  To her, whose pity watched, for ever nigh;
Oh! could he see the proud, the happy ray,
  This relic lights up on her generous eye,
Sighing, he'd feel how easy 'tis to pay
  A friendship all his kingdoms could not buy.

_Paris, July_, 1821






EPILOGUE.

WRITTEN FOR LADY DACRE'S TRAGEDY OF INA.


Last night, as lonely o'er my fire I sat,
Thinking of cues, starts, exits, and--all that,
And wondering much what little knavish sprite
Had put it first in women's heads to write:--
Sudden I saw--as in some witching dream--
A bright-blue glory round my book-case beam,
From whose quick-opening folds of azure light
Out flew a tiny form, as small and bright
As Puck the Fairy, when he pops his head,
Some sunny morning from a violet bed.
"Bless me!" I starting cried "what imp are you?"--
"A small he-devil, Ma'am--my name BAS BLEU--
"A bookish sprite, much given to routs and reading;
"'Tis I who teach your spinsters of good breeding,
"The reigning taste in chemistry and caps,
"The last new bounds of tuckers and of maps,
"And when the waltz has twirled her giddy brain
"With metaphysics twirl it back again!"
I viewed him, as he spoke--his hose were blue,
His wings--the covers of the last Review--
Cerulean, bordered with a jaundice hue,
And tinselled gayly o'er, for evening wear,
Till the next quarter brings a new-fledged pair.
"Inspired by me--(pursued this waggish Fairy)--
"That best of wives and Sapphos, Lady Mary,
"Votary alike of Crispin and the Muse,
"Makes her own splay-foot epigrams and shoes.
"For me the eyes of young Camilla shine,
"And mingle Love's blue brilliances with mine;
"For me she sits apart, from coxcombs shrinking,
"Looks wise--the pretty soul!--and _thinks_ she's thinking.
"By my advice Miss Indigo attends
"Lectures on Memory, and assures her friends,
"''Pon honor!--(_mimics_)--nothing can surpass the plan
"'Of that professor--(_trying to recollect_)--psha! that memory-man--
"'That--what's his name?--him I attended lately--
"''Pon honor, he improved _my_ memory greatly.'"
Here curtsying low, I asked the blue-legged sprite,
What share he had in this our play to-night.
'Nay, there--(he cried)--there I am guiltless quite--
"What! choose a heroine from that Gothic time
"When no one waltzed and none but monks could rhyme;
"When lovely woman, all unschooled and wild,
"Blushed without art, and without culture smiled--
"Simple as flowers, while yet unclassed they shone,
"Ere Science called their brilliant world her own,
"Ranged the wild, rosy things in learned orders,
"And filled with Greek the garden's blushing borders!--
"No, no--your gentle Inas will not do--
"To-morrow evening, when the lights burn blue,
"I'll come--(_pointing downwards_)--you understand--till then adieu!"

  And _has_ the sprite been here! No--jests apart--
Howe'er man rules in science and in art,
The sphere of woman's glories is the heart.
And, if our Muse have sketched with pencil true
The wife--the mother--firm, yet gentle too--
Whose soul, wrapt up in ties itself hath spun,
Trembles, if touched in the remotest one;
Who loves--yet dares even Love himself disown,
When Honor's broken shaft supports his throne:
If such our Ina, she may scorn the evils,
Dire as they are, of Critics and--Blue Devils.






THE DAY-DREAM.[1]


They both were husht, the voice, the chords,--
  I heard but once that witching lay;
And few the notes, and few the words.
  My spell-bound memory brought away;

Traces, remembered here and there,
  Like echoes of some broken strain;--
Links of a sweetness lost in air,
  That nothing now could join again.

Even these, too, ere the morning, fled;
  And, tho' the charm still lingered on,
That o'er each sense her song had shed,
  The song itself was faded, gone;--

Gone, like the thoughts that once were ours,
  On summer days, ere youth had set;
Thoughts bright, we know, as summer flowers,
  Tho' _what_ they were we now forget.

In vain with hints from other strains
  I wooed this truant air to come--
As birds are taught on eastern plains
  To lure their wilder kindred home.

In vain:--the song that Sappho gave,
  In dying, to the mournful sea,
Not muter slept beneath the wave
  Than this within my memory.

At length, one morning, as I lay
  In that half-waking mood when dreams
Unwillingly at last gave way
  To the full truth of daylight's beams,

A face--the very face, methought,
  From which had breathed, as from a shrine
Of song and soul, the notes I sought--
  Came with its music close to mine;

And sung the long-lost measure o'er,--
  Each note and word, with every tone
And look, that lent it life before,--
  All perfect, all again my own!

Like parted souls, when, mid the Blest
  They meet again, each widowed sound
Thro' memory's realm had winged in quest
  Of its sweet mate, till all were found.

Nor even in waking did the clew,
  Thus strangely caught, escape again;
For never lark its matins knew
  So well as now I knew this strain.

And oft when memory's wondrous spell
  Is talked of in our tranquil bower,
I sing this lady's song, and tell
  The vision of that morning hour.


[1] In these stanzas I have done little more than relate a fact in verse;
and the lady, whose singing gave rise to this curious instance of the
power of memory in sleep, is Mrs. Robert Arkwright.






SONG.


Where is the heart that would not give
  Years of drowsy days and nights,
One little hour, like this, to live--
  Full, to the brim, of life's delights?
    Look, look around,
    This fairy ground,
  With love-lights glittering o'er;
    While cups that shine
    With freight divine
  Go coasting round its shore.

Hope is the dupe of future hours,
  Memory lives in those gone by;
Neither can see the moment's flowers
  Springing up fresh beneath the eye,
    Wouldst thou, or thou,
    Forego what's _now_,
  For all that Hope may say?
    No--Joy's reply,
    From every eye,
  Is, "Live we while we may,"






SONG OF THE POCO-CURANTE SOCIETY.


    _haud curat Hippoclides_.
    ERASM. _Adag_.


To those we love we've drank tonight;
  But now attend and stare not,
While I the ampler list recite
  Of those for whom WE CARE NOT.

For royal men, howe'er they frown,
  If on their fronts they bear not
That noblest gem that decks a crown,
  The People's Love--WE CARE NOT.

For slavish men who bend beneath
  A despot yoke, yet dare not
Pronounce the will whose very breath
  Would rend its links--WE CARE NOT.

For priestly men who covet sway
  And wealth, tho' they declare not;
Who point, like finger-posts, the way
  They never go--WE CARE NOT.

For martial men who on their sword,
  Howe'er it conquers, wear not
The pledges of a soldier's word,
  Redeemed and pure--WE CARE NOT.

For legal men who plead for wrong.
  And, tho' to lies they swear not,
Are hardly better than the throng
  Of those who do--WE CARE NOT.

For courtly men who feed upon
  The land, like grubs, and spare not
The smallest leaf where they can sun
  Their crawling limbs--WE CARE NOT.

For wealthy men who keep their mines
  In darkness hid, and share not
The paltry ore with him who pines
  In honest want--WE CARE NOT.

For prudent men who hold the power
  Of Love aloof, and bare not
Their hearts in any guardless hour
  To Beauty's shaft--WE CARE NOT.

For all, in short, on land or sea,
  In camp or court, who _are_ not,
Who never _were_, or e'er _will_ be
  Good men and true--WE CARE NOT.






ANNE BOLEYN.

TRANSLATION FROM THE METRICAL

"_Histoire d'Anne Boleyn."_


    _"S'elle estoit belle et de taille lgante,
    Estoit des yeulx encor plus attirante,
    Lesquelz savoit bien conduyre  propos
    En les lenant quelquefoys en repos;
    Aucune foys envoyant en message
    Porter du cueur le secret tesmoignage_."


Much as her form seduced the sight,
  Her eyes could even more surely woo;
And when and how to shoot their light
  Into men's hearts full well she knew.
For sometimes in repose she hid
Their rays beneath a downcast lid;
And then again, with wakening air,
  Would send their sunny glances out,
Like heralds of delight, to bear
  Her heart's sweet messages about.






THE DREAM OF THE TWO SISTERS.

FROM DANTE.


    _Nell ora, credo, che dell'oriente
      Prima raggio nel monte Citerea,
      Che di fuoco d'amor par sempre dente,
    Giovane e bella in sogno mi parea
      Donna vedere andar per una landa
      Cogliendo flori; e cantando dicea ;--
    Sappia qualunque'l mio nome dimanda,
      Ch'io mi son Lia, e vo movendo 'ntorno
      Le belle mani a farmi una ghirlanda--
    Per piacermi allo specchio qui m'adorno;
      Ma mia suora Rachel mai non si smaga
      Dal suo ammiraglio, e siede tutto il giorno_.

    _Ell'  de'suoi begli occhi veder vaga,
      Com' io dell'adornarmi con le mani;
      Lei lo vodere e me l'ovrare appaga_.

    DANTE, _Purg. Canto xxvii_.


'Twas eve's soft hour, and bright, above.
  The star of beauty beamed,
While lulled by light so full of love,
  In slumber thus I dreamed--
Methought, at that sweet hour,
  A nymph came o'er the lea,
Who, gathering many a flower,
  Thus said and sung to me:--
"Should any ask what Leila loves,
  "Say thou, To wreathe her hair
"With flowerets culled from glens and groves,
  "Is Leila's only care.

"While thus in quest of flowers rare,
  "O'er hill and dale I roam,
"My sister, Rachel, far more fair,
  "Sits lone and mute at home.
"Before her glass untiring,
  "With thoughts that never stray,
"Her own bright eyes admiring,
  "She sits the live-long day;
"While I!--oh, seldom even a look
  "Of self salutes my eye;
"My only glass, the limpid brook,
  "That shines and passes by."






SOVEREIGN WOMAN.

A BALLAD.


The dance was o'er, yet still in dreams
  That fairy scene went on;
Like clouds still flusht with daylight gleams
  Tho' day itself is gone.
And gracefully to music's sound,
The same bright nymphs were gliding round;
While thou, the Queen of all, wert there--
The Fairest still, where all were fair.
The dream then changed--in halls of state,
  I saw thee high enthroned;
While, ranged around, the wise, the great,
  In thee their mistress owned;
And still the same, thy gentle sway
O'er willing subjects won its way--
Till all confest the Right Divine
To rule o'er man was only thine!

But, lo, the scene now changed again--
  And borne on plumed steed,
I saw thee o'er the battle-plain
  Our land's defenders lead:
And stronger in thy beauty's charms,
Than man, with countless hosts in arms,
Thy voice, like music, cheered the Free,
Thy very smile was victory!

Nor reign such queens on thrones alone--
  In cot and court the same,
Wherever woman's smile is known,
  Victoria's still her name.
For tho' she almost blush to reign,
Tho' Love's own flowerets wreath the chain,
Disguise our bondage as we will,
'Tis woman, woman, rules us still.






COME, PLAY ME THAT SIMPLE AIR AGAIN.

A BALLAD.


Come, play me that simple air again,
  I used so to love, in life's young day,
And bring, if thou canst, the dreams that then
  Were wakened by that sweet lay
    The tender gloom its strain
      Shed o'er the heart and brow
    Grief's shadow without its pain--
      Say where, where is it now?
But play me the well-known air once more,
  For thoughts of youth still haunt its strain
Like dreams of some far, fairy shore
  We never shall see again.

Sweet air, how every note brings back
  Some sunny hope, some daydream bright,
That, shining o'er life's early track,
  Filled even its tears with light.
    The new-found life that came
    With love's first echoed vow;--
  The fear, the bliss, the shame--
    Ah--where, where are they now?
But, still the same loved notes prolong,
  For sweet 'twere thus, to that old lay,
In dreams of youth and love and song,
  To breathe life's hour away.








POEMS FROM THE EPICUREAN

(1827.)






THE VALLEY OF THE NILE.


Far as the sight can reach, beneath as clear
And blue a heaven as ever blest this sphere,
Gardens and pillared streets and porphyry domes
And high-built temples, fit to be the homes
Of mighty gods, and pyramids whose hour
Outlasts all time, above the waters tower!

Then, too, the scenes of pomp and joy that make
One theatre of this vast peopled lake,
Where all that Love, Religion, Commerce gives
Of life and motion, ever moves and lives,
Here, up in the steps of temples, from the wave
Ascending, in procession slow and grave,
Priests in white garments go, with sacred wands
And silver cymbals gleaming in their hands:
While there, rich barks--fresh from those sunny tracts
Far off, beyond the sounding cataracts--
Glide with their precious lading to the sea,
Plumes of bright birds, rhinoceros' ivory,
Gems from the isle of Mero, and those grains
Of gold, washed down by Abyssinian rains.

Here, where the waters wind into a bay
Shadowy and cool, some pilgrims on their way
To Sas or Bubastus, among beds
Of lotos flowers that close above their heads,
Push their light barks, and hid as in a bower
Sing, talk, or sleep away the sultry hour,
While haply, not far off, beneath a bank
Of blossoming acacias, many a prank
Is played in the cool current by a train
Of laughing nymphs, lovely as she whose chain
Around two conquerors of the world was cast;
But, for a third too feeble, broke at last.






SONG OF THE TWO CUPBEARERS.


FIRST CUPBEARER.

Drink of this cup--Osiris sips
  The same in his halls below;
And the same he gives, to cool the lips
  Of the dead, who downward go.

Drink of this cup--the water within
  Is fresh from Lethe's stream;
'Twill make the past, with all its sin,
  And all its pain and sorrows, seem
  Like a long forgotten dream;
The pleasure, whose charms
  Are steeped in woe;
The knowledge, that harms
  The soul to know;

The hope, that bright
  As the lake of the waste,
Allures the sight
  And mocks the taste;

The love, that binds
  Its innocent wreath,
Where the serpent winds
  In venom beneath!--

All that of evil or false, by thee
  Hath ever been known or seen,
Shalt melt away in this cup, and be
  Forgot as it never had been!

SECOND CUPBEARER.

Drink of this cup--when Isis led
  Her boy of old to the beaming sky,
She mingled a draught divine and said.--
 "Drink of this cup, thou'lt never die!"

Thus do I say and sing to thee.
  Heir of that boundless heaven on high,
Though frail and fallen and lost thou be,
  "Drink of this cup, thou'lt never die!"

       *       *       *       *       *

And Memory, too, with her dreams shall come,
  Dreams of a former, happier day,
When heaven was still the spirit's home,
  And her wings had not yet fallen away.

Glimpses of glory ne'er forgot,
  That tell, like gleams on a sunset sea,
What once hath been, what now is not.
  But oh! what again shall brightly be!"






SONG OF THE NUBIAN GIRL.


    O Abyssinian tree,
    We pray, we pray to thee;
By the glow of thy golden fruit
  And the violet hue of the flower,
    And the greeting mute
    Of thy boughs' salute
  To the stranger who seeks thy bow.

    O Abyssinian tree!
    How the traveller blesses thee
When the light no moon allows,
  And the sunset hour is near,
    And thou bend'st thy boughs
    To kiss his brows.
  Saying, "Come, rest thee here."
    O Abyssinian tree!
    Thus bow thy head to me!








THE SUMMER FTE.




TO THE HONORABLE MRS. NORTON.


For the groundwork of the following Poem I am indebted to a memorable
Fte, given some years since, at Boyle Farm, the seat of the late Lord
Henry Fitzgerald. In commemoration of that evening--of which the lady to
whom these pages are inscribed was, I well recollect, one of the most
distinguished ornaments--I was induced at the time to write some verses,
which were afterwards, however, thrown aside unfinished, on my discovering
that the same task had been undertaken by a noble poet,[1] whose playful
and happy _jeu d'esprit_ on the subject has since been published. It was
but lately, that, on finding the fragments of my own sketch among my
papers, I thought of founding on them such a description of an imaginary
Fte as might furnish me with situations for the introduction of music.

Such is the origin and object of the following Poem, and to MRS. NORTON it
is, with every feeling of admiration and regard, inscribed by her father's
warmly attached friend,

                                                  THOMAS MOORE.

_Sloperton Cottage_,

_November 1881_


[1] Lord Francis Egerton.






THE SUMMER FTE


"Where are ye now, ye summer days,
"That once inspired the poet's lays?
"Blest time! ere England's nymphs and swains,
  "For lack of sunbeams, took to coals--
"Summers of light, undimmed by rains,
"Whose only mocking trace remains
  "In watering-pots and parasols."

Thus spoke a young Patrician maid,
  As, on the morning of that Fte
  Which bards unborn shall celebrate,
She backward drew her curtain's shade,
And, closing one half-dazzled eye,
Peeped with the other at the sky--
The important sky, whose light or gloom
Was to decide, this day, the doom
Of some few hundred beauties, wits,
Blues, Dandies, Swains, and Exquisites.

Faint were her hopes; for June had now
  Set in with all his usual rigor!
Young Zephyr yet scarce knowing how
To nurse a bud, or fan a bough,
  But Eurus in perpetual vigor;
And, such the biting summer air,
That she, the nymph now nestling there--
Snug as her own bright gems recline
At night within their cotton shrine--
Had more than once been caught of late
Kneeling before her blazing grate,
Like a young worshipper of fire,
  With hands uplifted to the flame,
Whose glow as if to woo them nigher.
  Thro' the white fingers flushing came.

But oh! the light, the unhoped-for light,
  That now illumed this morning's heaven!
Up sprung Inthe at the sight,
  Tho'--hark!--the clocks but strike eleven,
And rarely did the nymph surprise
Mankind so early with her eyes.
Who now will say that England's sun
  (Like England's self, these spendthrift days)
His stock of wealth hath near outrun,
  And must retrench his golden rays--
Pay for the pride of sunbeams past,
And to mere moonshine come at last?

"Calumnious thought!" Inthe cries,
  While coming mirth lit up each glance,
And, prescient of the ball, her eyes
  Already had begun to dance:
For brighter sun than that which now
  Sparkled o'er London's spires and towers,
Had never bent from heaven his brow
  To kiss Firenze's City of Flowers.

What must it be--if thus so fair.
Mid the smoked groves of Grosvenor Square--
What must it be where Thames is seen
Gliding between his banks of green,
While rival villas, on each side,
Peep from their bowers to woo his tide,
And, like a Turk between two rows
Of Harem beauties, on he goes--
A lover, loved for even the grace
With which he slides from their embrace.

In one of those enchanted domes,
  One, the most flowery, cool, and bright
Of all by which that river roams,
  The Fte is to be held to-night--
That Fte already linked to fame,
  Whose cards, in many a fair one's sight
(When looked for long, at last they came,)
  Seemed circled with a fairy light;--
That Fte to which the cull, the flower
Of England's beauty, rank and power,
From the young spinster, just come _out_,
  To the old Premier, too long _in_--
From legs of far descended gout,
  To the last new-mustachioed chin--
All were convoked by Fashion's spells
To the small circle where she dwells,
Collecting nightly, to allure us,
  Live atoms, which, together hurled,
She, like another Epicurus,
  Sets dancing thus, and calls "the World."

Behold how busy in those bowers
(Like May-flies in and out of flowers.)
The countless menials, swarming run,
To furnish forth ere set of sun
The banquet-table richly laid
Beneath yon awning's lengthened shade,
Where fruits shall tempt and wines entice,
  And Luxury's self, at Gunter's call,
Breathe from her summer-throne of ice
  A spirit of coolness over all.

And now the important hour drew nigh,
When, 'neath the flush of evening's sky,
The west-end "world" for mirth let loose,
And moved, as he of Syracuse[1]
Ne'er dreamt of moving worlds, by force
  Of four horse power, had all combined
Thro' Grosvenor Gate to speed their course,
  Leaving that portion of mankind,
  Whom they call "Nobody," behind;
No star for London's feasts to-day,
No moon of beauty, new this May,
To lend the night her crescent ray;--
Nothing, in short, for ear or eye,
But veteran belles and wits gone by,
The relics of a past beau-monde,
A world like Cuvier's, long dethroned!
Even Parliament this evening nods
Beneath the harangues of minor Gods,
  On half its usual opiate's share;
The great dispensers of repose,
The first-rate furnishers of prose
  Being all called to--prose elsewhere.

Soon as thro' Grosvenor's lordly square--
  That last impregnable redoubt,
Where, guarded with Patrician care,
  Primeval Error still holds out--
Where never gleam of gas must dare
  'Gainst ancient Darkness to revolt,
Nor smooth Macadam hope to spare
  The dowagers one single jolt;--
Where, far too stately and sublime
To profit by the lights of time,
Let Intellect march how it will,
They stick to oil and watchman still:--
Soon as thro' that illustrious square
  The first epistolary bell.
Sounding by fits upon the air,
  Of parting pennies rung the knell;
Warned by that tell-tale of the hours,
  And by the day-light's westering beam,
The young Inthe, who, with flowers
  Half crowned, had sat in idle dream
Before her glass, scarce knowing where
Her fingers roved thro' that bright hair,
  While, all capriciously, she now
  Dislodged some curl from her white brow,
And now again replaced it there:--
As tho' her task was meant to be
One endless change of ministry--
A routing-up of Loves and Graces,
But to plant others in their places.

Meanwhile--what strain is that which floats
Thro' the small boudoir near--like notes
Of some young bird, its task repeating
For the next linnet music-meeting?
A voice it was, whose gentle sounds
Still kept a modest octave's bounds,
Nor yet had ventured to exalt
Its rash ambition to _B alt_,
That point towards which when ladies rise,
The wise man takes his hat and--flies.
Tones of a harp, too, gently played,
  Came with this youthful voice communing;
Tones true, for once, without the aid
  Of that inflictive process, tuning--
A process which must oft have given
  Poor Milton's ears a deadly wound;
So pleased, among the joys of Heaven,
  He specifies "harps _ever_ tuned."
She who now sung this gentle strain
  Was our young nymph's still younger sister--
Scarce ready yet for Fashion's train
  In their light legions to enlist her,
But counted on, as sure to bring
Her force into the field next spring.

The song she thus, like Jubal's shell,
Gave forth "so sweetly and so well,"
Was one in Morning Post much famed,
From a _divine_ collection, named,
  "Songs of the Toilet"--every Lay
Taking for subject of its Muse,
  Some branch of feminine array,
Some item, with full scope, to choose,
From diamonds down to dancing shoes;
From the last hat that Herbault's hands
  Bequeathed to an admiring world,
Down to the latest flounce that stands
Like Jacob's Ladder--or expands
  Far forth, tempestuously unfurled.

Speaking of one of these new Lays,
The Morning Post thus sweetly says:--
"Not all that breathes from Bishop's lyre,
  "That Barnett dreams, or Cooke conceives,
"Can match for sweetness, strength, or fire,
  "This fine Cantata upon Sleeves.
"The very notes themselves reveal
  "The cut of each new sleeve so well;
"A _flat_ betrays the _Imbcilles_,[2]
  "Light fugues the flying lappets tell;
"While rich cathedral chords awake
'Our homage for the _Manches d'vque_."

'Twas the first opening song the Lay
  Of all least deep in toilet-lore,
That the young nymph, to while away
  The tiring-hour, thus warbled o'er:--


SONG.


Array thee, love, array thee, love,
  In all thy best array thee;
The sun's below--the moon's above--
  And Night and Bliss obey thee.
Put on thee all that's bright and rare,
  The zone, the wreath, the gem,
Not so much gracing charms so fair,
  As borrowing grace from them.
Array thee, love, array thee, love,
  In all that's bright array thee;
The sun's below--the moon's above--
  And Night and Bliss obey thee.

Put on the plumes thy lover gave.
  The plumes, that, proudly dancing,
Proclaim to all, where'er they wave,
  Victorious eyes advancing.
Bring forth the robe whose hue of heaven
  From thee derives such light,
That Iris would give all her seven
  To boast but _one_ so bright.
Array thee, love, array thee, love, etc.

Now hie thee, love, now hie thee, love,
  Thro' Pleasure's circles hie thee.
And hearts, where'er thy footsteps move,
  Will beat when they come nigh thee.
Thy every word shall be a spell,
  Thy every look a ray,
And tracks of wondering eyes shall tell
  The glory of thy way!
Now hie thee, love, now hie thee, love,
  Thro' Pleasure's circles hie thee,
And hearts, where'er thy footsteps move,
  Shall beat when they come nigh thee.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now in his Palace of the West,
  Sinking to slumber, the bright Day,
Like a tired monarch fanned to rest,
  Mid the cool airs of Evening lay;
While round his couch's golden rim
  The gaudy clouds, like courtiers, crept--
Struggling each other's light to dim,
  And catch his last smile e'er he slept.
How gay, as o'er the gliding Thames
  The golden eve its lustre poured,
Shone out the high-born knights and dames
  Now grouped around that festal board;
A living mass of plumes and flowers.
As tho' they'd robbed both birds and bowers--
A peopled rainbow, swarming thro'
With habitants of every hue;
While, as the sparkling juice of France
High in the crystal brimmers flowed,
  Each sunset ray that mixt by chance
With the wine's sparkles, showed
  How sunbeams may be taught to dance.
If not in written form exprest,
'Twas known at least to every guest,
That, tho' not bidden to parade
Their scenic powers in masquerade,
(A pastime little found to thrive
  In the bleak fog of England's skies,
Where wit's the thing we best contrive,
  As masqueraders, to _disguise_,)
It yet was hoped-and well that hope
  Was answered by the young and gay--
  That in the toilet's task to-day
Fancy should take her wildest scope;--
That the rapt milliner should be
Let loose thro fields of poesy,
The tailor, in inventive trance,
  Up to the heights of Epic clamber,
And all the regions of Romance
  Be ransackt by the _femme de chambre_.

Accordingly, with gay Sultanas,
Rebeccas, Sapphos, Roxalanas--
Circassian slaves whom Love would pay
  Half his maternal realms to ransom;--
Young nuns, whose chief religion lay
  In looking most profanely handsome;--
Muses in muslin-pastoral maids
With hats from the _Arcade-ian_ shades,
And fortune-tellers, rich, 'twas plain,
As fortune-_hunters_ formed their train.

With these and more such female groups,
Were mixt no less fantastic troops
Of male exhibitors--all willing
To look even more than usual killing;--
Beau tyrants, smock-faced braggadocios,
And brigands, charmingly ferocious:--
M.P.'s turned Turks, good Moslems then,
  Who, last night, voted for the Greeks;
And Friars, stanch No-Popery men,
  In close confab with Whig Caciques.

But where is she--the nymph whom late
  We left before her glass delaying
Like Eve, when by the lake she sate,
  In the clear wave her charms surveying,
And saw in that first glassy mirror
The first fair face that lured to error.
"Where is she," ask'st thou?--watch all looks
  As centring to one point they bear,
Like sun-flowers by the sides of brooks,
  Turned to the sun--and she is there.
Even in disguise, oh never doubt
By her own light you'd track her out:
As when the moon, close shawled in fog,
Steals as she thinks, thro' heaven _incog_.,
Tho' hid herself, some sidelong ray
At every step, detects her way.

But not in dark disguise to-night
Hath our young heroine veiled her light;--
For see, she walks the earth, Love's own.
  His wedded bride, by _holiest_ vow
Pledged in Olympus, and made known
  To mortals by the type which now
  Hangs glittering on her snowy brow,
That butterfly, mysterious trinket,
Which means the Soul (tho' few would think it),
And sparkling thus on brow so white,
Tells us we've Psyche here tonight!
But hark! some song hath caught her ears--
  And, lo, how pleased, as tho' she'd ne'er
Heard the Grand Opera of the Spheres,
  Her goddess-ship approves the air;
And to a mere terrestrial strain,
Inspired by naught but pink champagne,
  Her butterfly as gayly nods
As tho' she sate with all her train
  At some great Concert of the Gods,
With Phoebus, leader--Jove, director,
And half the audience drunk with nectar.

From the male group the carol came--
  A few gay youths whom round the board
The last-tried flask's superior fame
  Had lured to taste the tide it poured;
And one who from his youth and lyre
Seemed grandson to the Teian-sire,
Thus gayly sung, while, to his song,
Replied in chorus the gay throng:--


SONG.


Some mortals there may be, so wise, or so fine,
  As in evenings like this no enjoyment to see;
But, as I'm not particular--wit, love, and wine,
  Are for one night's amusement sufficient for me.
Nay--humble and strange as my tastes may appear--
  If driven to the worst, I could manage, thank Heaven,
To put up with eyes such as beam round me here,
  And such wine as we're sipping, six days out of seven.
So pledge me a bumper--your sages profound
  May be blest, if they will, on their own patent plan:
But as we are _not_ sages, why--send the cup round--
  We must only be happy the best way we can.

A reward by some king was once offered, we're told,
  To whoe'er could invent a new bliss for mankind;
But talk of _new_ pleasures!--give me but the old,
  And I'll leave your inventors all new ones they find.
Or should I, in quest of fresh realms of bliss,
  Set sail in the pinnace of Fancy some day,
Let the rich rosy sea I embark on be this,
  And such eyes as we've here be the stars of my way!
In the mean time, a bumper--your Angels, on high,
  May have pleasures unknown to life's limited span;
But, as we are _not_ Angels, why--let the flask fly--
  We must be happy _all_ ways that we can.

       *       *       *       *       *

Now nearly fled was sunset's light,
  Leaving but so much of its beam
As gave to objects, late so blight,
  The coloring of a shadowy dream;
And there was still where Day had set
  A flush that spoke him loath to die--
A last link of his glory yet,
  Binding together earth and sky.
Say, why is it that twilight best
Becomes even brows the loveliest?
That dimness with its softening Touch
  Can bring out grace unfelt before,
And charms we ne'er can see too much,
  When seen but half enchant the more?
Alas, it is that every joy
In fulness finds its worst alloy,
And half a bliss, but hoped or guessed,
Is sweeter than the whole possest;--
That Beauty, when least shone upon,
  A creature most ideal grows;
And there's no light from moon or sun
  Like that Imagination throws;--
It is, alas, that Fancy shrinks
  Even from a bright reality,
And turning inly, feels and thinks
  For heavenlier things than e'er will be.

Such was the effect of twilight's hour
  On the fair groups that, round and round,
From glade to grot, from bank to bower,
  Now wandered thro' this fairy ground;
And thus did Fancy--and champagne--
  Work on the sight their dazzling spells,
Till nymphs that looked at noonday plain,
  Now brightened in the gloom to belles;
And the brief interval of time,
  'Twixt after dinner and before,
To dowagers brought back their prime,
  And shed a halo round two-score.

Meanwhile, new pastimes for the eye,
  The ear, the fancy, quick succeed;
And now along the waters fly
  Light gondoles, of Venetian breed,
With knights and dames who, calm reclined,
  Lisp out love-sonnets as they glide--
Astonishing old Thames to find
  Such doings on his moral tide.

So bright was still that tranquil river,
With the last shaft from Daylight's quiver,
That many a group in turn were seen
Embarking on its wave serene;
And 'mong the rest, in chorus gay,
  A band of mariners, from the isles
  Of sunny Greece, all song and smiles,
As smooth they floated, to the play
Of their oar's cadence, sung this lay:--


TRIO.


Our home is on the sea, boy,
  Our home is on the sea;
    When Nature gave
    The ocean-wave,
  She markt it for the Free.
Whatever storms befall, boy,
  Whatever storms befall,
    The island bark
    Is Freedom's ark,
  And floats her safe thro' all.

Behold yon sea of isles, boy,
  Behold yon sea of isles,
    Where every shore
    Is sparkling o'er
  With Beauty's richest smiles.
For us hath Freedom claimed, boy,
  For us hath Freedom claimed
    Those ocean-nests
    Where Valor rests
  His eagle wing untamed.

And shall the Moslem dare, boy,
  And shall the Moslem dare,
    While Grecian hand
    Can wield a brand,
  To plant his Crescent there?
No--by our fathers, no, boy,
  No, by the Cross, we show--
    From Maina's rills
    To Thracia's hills
  All Greece re-echoes "No!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Like pleasant thoughts that o'er the mind
  A minute come and go again,
Even so by snatches in the wind,
  Was caught and lost that choral strain,
Now full, now faint upon the ear,
As the bark floated far or near.
At length when, lost, the closing note
  Had down the waters died along,
Forth from another fairy boat,
  Freighted with music, came this song--


SONG.


Smoothly flowing thro' verdant vales,
  Gentle river, thy current runs,
Sheltered safe from winter gales,
  Shaded cool from summer suns.
Thus our Youth's sweet moments glide.
  Fenced with flowery shelter round;
No rude tempest wakes the tide,
  All its path is fairy ground.

But, fair river, the day will come,
  When, wooed by whispering groves in vain,
Thou'lt leave those banks, thy shaded home,
  To mingle with the stormy main.
And thou, sweet Youth, too soon wilt pass
  Into the world's unsheltered sea,
Where, once thy wave hath mixt, alas,
  All hope of peace is lost for thee.

Next turn we to the gay saloon,
Resplendent as a summer noon,
  Where, 'neath a pendent wreath of lights,
A Zodiac of flowers and tapers--
(Such as in Russian ball-rooms sheds
Its glory o'er young dancers' heads)--
  Quadrille performs her mazy rites,
And reigns supreme o'er slides and capers;--

Working to death each opera strain,
  As, with a foot that ne'er reposes,
She jigs thro' sacred and profane,
  From "Maid and Magpie" up to "Moses;"--[3]
Wearing out tunes as fast as shoes,
  Till fagged Rossini scarce respires;
Till Meyerbeer for mercy sues,
  And Weber at her feet expires.

And now the set hath ceased--the bows
Of fiddlers taste a brief repose,
While light along the painted floor,
  Arm within arm, the couples stray,
Talking their stock of nothings o'er,
  Till--nothing's left at last to say.
When lo!--most opportunely sent--
  Two Exquisites, a he and she,
Just brought from Dandyland, and meant
  For Fashion's grand Menagerie,
Entered the room--and scarce were there
When all flocked round them, glad to stare
At _any_ monsters, _any_ where.
Some thought them perfect, to their tastes;
While others hinted that the waists
(That in particular of the _he_ thing)
Left far too ample room for breathing:
Whereas, to meet these critics' wishes,
  The isthmus there should be so small,
That Exquisites, at last, like fishes,
  Must manage not to breathe at all.
The female (these same critics said),
  Tho' orthodox from toe to chin,
Yet lacked that spacious width of head
  To hat of toadstool much akin--
That build of bonnet, whose extent
Should, like a doctrine of dissent,
  Puzzle church-doors to let it in.

However--sad as 'twas, no doubt,
That nymph so smart should go about,
With head unconscious of the place
It _ought_ to fill in Infinite Space--
Yet all allowed that, of her kind,
A prettier show 'twas hard to find;
While of that doubtful genus, "dressy men,"
The male was thought a first-rate specimen.
Such _Savans_, too, as wisht to trace
The manners, habits, of this race--
To know what rank (if rank at all)
'Mong reasoning things to them should fall--
What sort of notions heaven imparts
To high-built heads and tight-laced hearts
And how far Soul, which, Plato says,
Abhors restraint, can act in stays--
Might now, if gifted with discerning,
Find opportunities of learning:
As these two creatures--from their pout
And frown, 'twas plain--had just fallen out;
And all their little thoughts, of course.
Were stirring in full fret and force;--
Like mites, through microscope espied,
A world of nothings magnified.

But mild the vent such beings seek,
The tempest of their souls to speak:
As Opera swains to fiddles sigh,
To fiddles fight, to fiddles die,
Even so this tender couple set
Their well-bred woes to a Duet.


WALTZ DUET.


HE.
Long as I waltzed with only thee,
  Each blissful Wednesday that went by,
Nor stylish Stultz, nor neat Nugee
  Adorned a youth so blest as I.
    Oh! ah! ah! oh!
    Those happy days are gone--heigho!

SHE.
Long as with thee I skimmed the ground,
  Nor yet was scorned for Lady Jane,
No blither nymph tetotumed round
  To Collinet's immortal strain.
    Oh! ah! etc.
    Those happy days are gone--heigho!

HE.
With Lady Jane now whirled about,
  I know no bounds of time or breath;
And, should the charmer's head hold out,
  My heart and heels are hers till death.
    Oh! ah! etc.
    Still round and round thro' life we'll go.

SHE.
To Lord Fitznoodle's eldest son,
  A youth renowned for waistcoats smart,
I now have given (excuse the pun)
  A vested interest in my heart.
    Oh! ah! etc.
    Still round and round with him I'll go.

HE.
What if by fond remembrance led
  Again to wear our mutual chain.
For me thou cut'st Fitznoodle
   dead,
 And I _levant_ from Lady Jane.
  Oh! ah! etc.
  Still round and round again we'll go.

SHE.
Tho' he the Noodle honors give,
And thine, dear youth, are not so high,
With thee in endless waltz I'd live,
 With thee, to Weber's Stop--
      Waltz, die!
     Oh! ah! etc.
     Thus round and round thro' life we'll go.

[_Exeunt waltzing_.

       *       *       *       *       *

While thus, like motes that dance away
Existence in a summer ray,
These gay things, born but to quadrille,
The circle of their doom fulfil--
(That dancing doom whose law decrees
 That they should live on the alert toe
A life of ups-and-downs, like keys
  Of Broadwood's in a long concerto:--)
While thus the fiddle's spell, _within_,
 Calls up its realm of restless sprites.
_Without_, as if some Mandarin
 Were holding there his Feast of Lights,
Lamps of all hues, from walks and bowers,
Broke on the eye, like kindling flowers,
Till, budding into light, each tree
Bore its full fruit of brilliancy.

Here shone a garden-lamps all o'er,
  As tho' the Spirits of the Air
Had taken it in their heads to pour
  A shower of summer meteors there;--
While here a lighted shrubbery led
  To a small lake that sleeping lay,
Cradled in foliage but, o'er-head,
  Open to heaven's sweet breath and ray;
While round its rim there burning stood
  Lamps, with young flowers beside them bedded,
That shrunk from such warm neighborhood,
And, looking bashful in the flood,
  Blushed to behold themselves so wedded.

Hither, to this embowered retreat,
Fit but for nights so still and sweet;
  Nights, such as Eden's calm recall
  In its first lonely hour, when all
    So silent is, below, on high,
    That is a star falls down the sky,
  You almost think you hear it fall--
  Hither, to this recess, a few,
    To shun the dancers' wildering noise,
  And give an hour, ere night-time flew,
    To music's more ethereal joys,
  Came with their voices-ready all
  As Echo waiting for a call--
 In hymn or ballad, dirge or glee,
 To weave their mingling ministrelsy,
And first a dark-eyed nymph, arrayed--
Like her whom Art hath deathless made,
Bright Mona Lisa[4]--with that braid
Of hair across the brow, and one
Small gem that in the centre shone--
With face, too, in its form resembling
Da Vinci's Beauties-the dark eyes,
Now lucid as thro' crystal trembling,
  Now soft as if suffused with sighs--
Her lute that hung beside her took,
And, bending o'er it with shy look,
More beautiful, in shadow thus,
Than when with life most luminous,
Past her light finger o'er the chords,
And sung to them these mournful words:--


SONG.


Bring hither, bring thy lute, while day is dying--
  Here will I lay me and list to thy song;
Should tones of other days mix with its sighing,
  Tones of a light heart, now banisht so long,
Chase them away-they bring but pain,
And let thy theme be woe again.

Sing on thou mournful lute--day is fast going,
  Soon will its light from thy chords die away;
One little gleam in the west is still glowing,
  When that hath vanisht, farewell to thy lay.
Mark, how it fades!-see, it is fled!
Now, sweet lute, be thou, too, dead.

The group that late in garb of Greeks
  Sung their light chorus o'er the tide--
Forms, such as up the wooded creeks
  Of Helle's shore at noon-day glide,
Or nightly on her glistening sea,
Woo the bright waves with melody--
Now linked their triple league again
Of voices sweet, and sung a strain,
Such as, had Sappho's tuneful ear
  But caught it, on the fatal steep,
She would have paused, entranced, to hear,
  And for that day deferred her leap.


SONG AND TRIO.


On one of those sweet nights that oft
  Their lustre o'er the AEgean fling,
Beneath my casement, low and soft,
  I heard a Lesbian lover sing;
And, listening both with ear and thought,
These sounds upon the night breeze caught--
  "Oh, happy as the gods is he,
  "Who gazes at this hour on thee!"

The song was one by Sappho sung,
  In the first love-dreams of her lyre,
When words of passion from her tongue
  Fell like a shower of living fire.
And still, at close of every strain,
I heard these burning words again--
  "Oh, happy as the gods is he,
  "Who listens at this hour to thee!"

Once more to Mona Lisa turned
  Each asking eye--nor turned in vain
Tho' the quick, transient blush that burned
  Bright o'er her cheek and died again,
Showed with what inly shame and fear
Was uttered what all loved to hear.
Yet not to sorrow's languid lay
  Did she her lute-song now devote;
But thus, with voice that like a ray
  Of southern sunshine seemed to float--
  So rich with climate was each note--
Called up in every heart a dream
Of Italy with this soft theme:--


SONG.


Oh, where art thou dreaming,
  On land, or on sea?
In my lattice is gleaming
  The watch-light for thee;

And this fond heart is glowing
  To welcome thee home,
And the night is fast going,
  But thou art not come:
           No, thou com'st not!

'Tis the time when night-flowers
  Should wake from their rest;
'Tis the hour of all hours,
  When the lute singeth best,
But the flowers are half sleeping
  Till _thy_ glance they see;
And the husht lute is keeping
  Its music for thee.
            Yet, thou com'st not!

       *       *       *       *       *

Scarce had the last word left her lip,
When a light, boyish form, with trip
Fantastic, up the green walk came,
Prankt in gay vest to which the flame
Of every lamp he past, or blue
Or green or crimson, lent its hue;
As tho' a live chameleon's skin
He had despoiled, to robe him in.
A zone he wore of clattering shells,
  And from his lofty cap, where shone
A peacock's plume, there dangled bells
  That rung as he came dancing on.
Close after him, a page--in dress
And shape, his miniature express--
An ample basket, filled with store
Of toys and trinkets, laughing bore;
Till, having reached this verdant seat,
He laid it at his master's feet,
Who, half in speech and half in song,
Chanted this invoice to the throng:--


SONG.


Who'll buy?--'tis Folly's shop, who'll buy?--
  We've toys to suit all ranks and ages;
Besides our usual fools' supply,
  We've lots of playthings, too, for sages.
For reasoners here's a juggler's cup
  That fullest seems when nothing's in it;
And nine-pins set, like systems, up,
  To be knocked down the following minute.
     Who'll buy?--'tis Folly's shop, who'll buy?

Gay caps we here of foolscap make.
  For bards to wear in dog-day weather;
Or bards the bells alone may take,
  And leave to wits the cap and feather,
Tetotums we've for patriots got,
  Who court the mob with antics humble;
Like theirs the patriot's dizzy lot,
  A glorious spin, and then--a tumble,
                Who'll buy, etc.

Here, wealthy misers to inter,
  We've shrouds of neat post-obit paper;
While, for their heirs, we've _quick_silver,
  That, fast as they can wish, will caper.
For aldermen we've dials true,
  That tell no hour but that of dinner;
For courtly parsons sermons new,
  That suit alike both saint and sinner.
                Who'll buy, etc.

No time we've now to name our terms,
  But, whatsoe'er the whims that seize you,
  This oldest of all mortal firms,
  Folly and Co., will try to please you.
Or, should you wish a darker hue
Of goods than _we_ can recommend you,
Why then (as we with lawyers do)
  To Knavery's shop next door we'll send you.
                Who'll buy, etc.

While thus the blissful moments rolled,
  Moments of rare and fleeting light,
That show themselves, like grains of gold
  In the mine's refuse, few and bright;
Behold where, opening far away,
  The long Conservatory's range,
Stript of the flowers it wore all day,
  But gaining lovelier in exchange,
Presents, on Dresden's costliest ware,
A supper such as Gods might share.

Ah much-loved Supper!--blithe repast
Of other times, now dwindling fast,
Since Dinner far into the night
Advanced the march of appetite;
Deployed his never-ending forces
Of various vintage and three courses,
And, like those Goths who played the dickens
With Rome and all her sacred chickens,
Put Supper and her fowls so white,
Legs, wings, and drumsticks, all to flight.
Now waked once more by wine--whose tide
Is the true Hippocrene, where glide
The Muse's swans with happiest wing,
Dipping their bills before they sing--
The minstrels of the table greet
The listening ear with descant sweet:--


SONG AND TRIO.

THE LEVE AND COUCHE.


    Call the Loves around,
    Let the whispering sound
  Of their wings be heard alone.
    Till soft to rest
    My Lady blest
  At this bright hour hath gone,
    Let Fancy's beams
    Play o'er her dreams,
  Till, touched with light all through.
    Her spirit be
    Like a summer sea,
  Shining and slumbering too.
  And, while thus husht she lies,
  Let the whispered chorus rise--
"Good evening, good evening, to our
    Lady's bright eyes."

    But the day-beam breaks,
    See, our Lady wakes!
  Call the Loves around once more,
    Like stars that wait
    At Morning's gate,
  Her first steps to adore.
    Let the veil of night
    From her dawning sight
  All gently pass away,
    Like mists that flee
    From a summer sea,
  Leaving it full of day.
  And, while her last dream flies,
  Let the whispered chorus rise--
"Good morning, good morning, to our
    Lady's bright eyes."


SONG.


If to see thee be to love thee,
  If to love thee be to prize
Naught of earth or heaven above thee,
  Nor to live but for those eyes:
If such love to mortal given,
Be wrong to earth, be wrong to heaven,
'Tis not for thee the fault to blame,
For from those eyes the madness came.
Forgive but thou the crime of loving
  In this heart more pride 'twill raise
To be thus wrong with thee approving,
  Than right with all a world to praise!

       *       *       *       *       *

But say, while light these songs resound,
What means that buzz of whispering round,
From lip to lip--as if the Power
Of Mystery, in this gay hour,
Had thrown some secret (as we fling
Nuts among children) to that ring
Of rosy, restless lips, to be
Thus scrambled for so wantonly?
And, mark ye, still as each reveals
The mystic news, her hearer steals
A look towards yon enchanted chair,
  Where, like the Lady of the Masque,
A nymph, as exquisitely fair
  As Love himself for bride could ask,
Sits blushing deep, as if aware
Of the winged secret circling there.
Who is this nymph? and what, oh Muse,
  What, in the name of all odd things
That woman's restless brain pursues,
What mean these mystic whisperings?

Thus runs the tale:--yon blushing maid,
Who sits in beauty's light arrayed,
While o'er her leans a tall young Dervise,
(Who from her eyes, as all observe, is
Learning by heart the Marriage Service,)
Is the bright heroine of our song,--
The Love-wed Psyche, whom so long
We've missed among this mortal train,
We thought her winged to heaven again.

But no--earth still demands her smile;
Her friends, the Gods, must wait awhile.
And if, for maid of heavenly birth,
  A young Duke's proffered heart and hand
Be things worth waiting for on earth,
  Both are, this hour, at her command.
To-night, in yonder half-lit shade,
For love concerns expressly meant,
The fond proposal first was made,
  And love and silence blusht consent
Parents and friends (all here, as Jews,
Enchanters, house-maids, Turks, Hindoos,)
Have heard, approved, and blest the tie;
And now, hadst thou a poet's eye,
Thou might'st behold, in the air, above
That brilliant brow, triumphant Love,
Holding, as if to drop it down
Gently upon her curls, a crown
Of Ducal shape--but, oh, such gems!
Pilfered from Peri diadems,
And set in gold like that which shines
To deck the Fairy of the Mines:
In short, a crown all glorious--such as
Love orders when he makes a Duchess.

But see, 'tis morn in heaven; the Sun
Up in the bright orient hath begun
To canter his immortal beam;
  And, tho' not yet arrived in sight,
His leaders' nostrils send a steam
  Of radiance forth, so rosy bright
  As makes their onward path all light.
What's to be done? if Sol will be
So deuced early, so must we:
And when the day thus shines outright,
Even dearest friends must bid good night.
So, farewell, scene of mirth and masking,
  Now almost a by-gone tale;
Beauties, late in lamp-light basking,
  Now, by daylight, dim and pale;
Harpers, yawning o'er your harps,
Scarcely knowing flats from sharps;
Mothers who, while bored you keep
Time by nodding, nod to sleep;
Heads of hair, that stood last night
_Crp_, crispy, and upright,
But have now, alas, one sees, a
Leaning like the tower of Pisa;
Fare ye will--thus sinks away
 All that's mighty, all that's bright:
Tyre and Sidon had their day,
And even a Ball--has but its night!


[1] Archimedes.

[2] The name given to those large sleeves that hang loosely.

[3] In England the partition of this opera of Rossini was transferred to
the story of Peter the Hermit; by which means the indecorum of giving such
names as "Moyse," "Pharaon," etc., to the dancers selected from it (as was
done in Paris), has been avoided.

[4] The celebrated portrait by Leonardo da Vinci, which he is said to have
occupied four years in painting,--_Vasari_, vol. vii.








EVENINGS IN GREECE


In thus connecting together a series of Songs by a thread of poetical
narrative, my chief object has been to combine Recitation with Music, so
as to enable a greater number of persons to join in the performance, by
enlisting as readers those who may not feel willing or competent to take a
part as singers.

The Island of Zea where the scene is laid was called by the ancients
Ceos, and was the birthplace of Simonides, Bacchylides, and other eminent
persons. An account of its present state may be found in the Travels of
Dr. Clarke, who says, that "it appeared to him to be the best cultivated
of any of the Grecian Isles."--Vol. vi. p. 174.

T.M.






EVENINGS IN GREECE.




FIRST EVENING.


"The sky is bright--the breeze is fair,
  "And the mainsail flowing, full and free--
"Our farewell word is woman's prayer,
  "And the hope before us--Liberty!
    "Farewell, farewell.
  "To Greece we give our shining blades,
  "And our hearts to you, young Zean Maids!

"The moon is in the heavens above,
  "And the wind is on the foaming sea--
"Thus shines the star of woman's love
  "On the glorious strife of Liberty!
    "Farewell, farewell.
  "To Greece we give our shining blades,
  "And our hearts to you, young Zean Maids!"

  Thus sung they from the bark, that now
Turned to the sea its gallant prow,
Bearing within its hearts as brave,
As e'er sought Freedom o'er the wave;
And leaving on that islet's shore,
  Where still the farewell beacons burn,
Friends that shall many a day look o'er
  The long, dim sea for their return.

Virgin of Heaven! speed their way--
  Oh, speed their way,--the chosen flower,
Of Zea's youth, the hope and stay
  Of parents in their wintry hour,
The love of maidens and the pride
Of the young, happy, blushing bride,
Whose nuptial wreath has not yet died--
All, all are in that precious bark,
  Which now, alas! no more is seen--
Tho' every eye still turns to mark
  The moonlight spot where it had been.

Vainly you look, ye maidens, sires,
  And mothers, your beloved are gone!--
Now may you quench those signal fires,
  Whose light they long looked back upon
From their dark deck--watching the flame
  As fast it faded from their view,
With thoughts, that, but for manly shame,
  Had made them droop and weep like you.
Home to your chambers! home, and pray
For the bright coming of that day,
When, blest by heaven, the Cross shall sweep
The Crescent from the Aegean deep,
And your brave warriors, hastening back,
Will bring such glories in their track,
As shall, for many an age to come,
Shed light around their name and home.

  There is a Fount on Zea's isle,
Round which, in soft luxuriance, smile
All the sweet flowers, of every kind,
  On which the sun of Greece looks down,
  Pleased as a lover on the crown
His mistress for her brow hath twined,
When he beholds each floweret there,
Himself had wisht her most to wear;
Here bloomed the laurel-rose,[1] whose wreath
Hangs radiant round the Cypriot shines,
And here those bramble-flowers, that breathe
  Their odor into Zante's wines:--
The splendid woodbine that, as eve,
  To grace their floral diadems,
The lovely maids of Patmos weave:--[2]
And that fair plant whose tangled stems
Shine like a Nereid's hair,[3] when spread,
Dishevelled, o'er her azure bed:--
All these bright children of the clime,
(Each at its own most genial time,
The summer, or the year's sweet prime,)
  Like beautiful earth-stars, adorn
  The Valley where that Fount is born;
While round, to grace its cradle green
Groups of Velani oaks are seen
Towering on every verdant height--
Tall, shadowy, in the evening light,
Like Genii set to watch the birth
Of some enchanted child of earth--
Fair oaks that over Zea's vales,
  Stand with their leafy pride unfurled;
While Commerce from her thousand sails
  Scatters their fruit throughout the world![4]

  'Twas here--as soon as prayer and sleep
(Those truest friends to all who weep)
Had lightened every heart; and made
Even sorrow wear a softer shade--
'Twas here, in this secluded spot,
  Amid whose breathings calm and sweet
Grief might be soothed if not forgot,
  The Zean nymphs resolved to meet
Each evening now, by the same light
That saw their farewell tears that night:
And try if sound of lute and song,
  If wandering mid the moonlight flowers
In various talk, could charm along
  With lighter step, the lingering hours,
Till tidings of that Bark should come,
Or Victory waft their warriors home!

  When first they met--the wonted smile
Of greeting having gleamed awhile--
'Twould touch even Moslem heart to see
The sadness that came suddenly
O'er their young brows, when they looked round
Upon that bright, enchanted ground;
And thought how many a time with those
  Who now were gone to the rude wars
They there had met at evening's close,
  And danced till morn outshone the stars!

But seldom long doth hang the eclipse
  Of sorrow o'er such youthful breasts--
The breath from her own blushing lips,
  That on the maiden's mirror rests,
Not swifter, lighter from the glass,
Than sadness from her brow doth pass.

Soon did they now, as round the Well
  They sat, beneath the rising moon--
And some with voice of awe would tell
Of midnight fays and nymphs who dwell
  In holy founts--while some would time
Their idle lutes that now had lain
For days without a single strain;--
And others, from the rest apart,
With laugh that told the lightened heart,
Sat whispering in each other's ear
Secrets that all in turn would hear;--
Soon did they find this thoughtless play
So swiftly steal their griefs away,
  That many a nymph tho' pleased the while,
  Reproached her own forgetful smile,
And sighed to think she _could_ be gay.

Among these maidens there was one
  Who to Leucadia[5] late had been--
Had stood beneath the evening sun
  On its white towering cliffs and seen
The very spot where Sappho sung
Her swan-like music, ere she sprung
(Still holding, in that fearful leap,
By her loved lyre,) into the deep,
And dying quenched the fatal fire,
At once, of both her heart and lyre.

  Mutely they listened all--and well
Did the young travelled maiden tell
Of the dread height to which that steep
Beetles above the eddying deep--[6]
Of the lone sea-birds, wheeling round
The dizzy edge with mournful sound--
And of those scented lilies found
Still blooming on that fearful place--
As if called up by Love to grace
The immortal spot o'er which the last
Bright footsteps of his martyr past!

  While fresh to every listener's thought
These legends of Leucadia brought
All that of Sappho's hapless flame
Is kept alive, still watcht by Fame--
The maiden, tuning her soft lute,
While all the rest stood round her, mute,
Thus sketched the languishment of soul,
That o'er the tender Lesbian stole;
And in a voice whose thrilling tone
Fancy might deem the Lesbian's own,
One of those fervid fragments gave,
  Which still,--like sparkles of Greek Fire,
Undying, even beneath the wave,--
  Burn on thro' Time and ne'er expire.


SONG.


As o'er her loom the Lesbian Maid
  In love-sick languor hung her head,
Unknowing where her fingers strayed,
  She weeping turned away, and said,
"Oh, my sweet Mother--'tis in vain--
  "I cannot weave, as once I wove--
"So wildered is my heart and brain
  "With thinking of that youth I love!"

Again the web she tried to trace,
  But tears fell o'er each tangled thread;
While looking in her mother's face,
  Who watchful o'er her leaned, she said,
"Oh, my sweet Mother--'tis in vain--
  "I cannot weave, as once I wove--
"So wildered is my heart and brain
  "With thinking of that youth I love!"

       *       *       *       *       *

A silence followed this sweet air,
  As each in tender musing stood,
Thinking, with lips that moved in prayer,
  Of Sappho and that fearful flood:
While some who ne'er till now had known
  How much their hearts resembled hers,
Felt as they made her griefs their own,
  That _they_ too were Love's worshippers.

  At length a murmur, all but mute,
So faint it was, came from the lute
Of a young melancholy maid,
Whose fingers, all uncertain played
From chord to chord, as if in chase
  Of some lost melody, some strain
Of other times, whose faded trace
  She sought among those chords again.
Slowly the half-forgotten theme
  (Tho' born in feelings ne'er forgot)
Came to her memory--as a beam
  Falls broken o'er some shaded spot;--
And while her lute's sad symphony
Filled up each sighing pause between;
And Love himself might weep to see
  What ruin comes where he hath been--
As withered still the grass is found
Where fays have danced their merry round--
Thus simply to the listening throng
She breathed her melancholy song:--


SONG.


Weeping for thee, my love, thro' the long day,
Lonely and wearily life wears away.
Weeping for thee, my love, thro' the long night--
No rest in darkness, no joy in light!
Naught left but Memory whose dreary tread
Sounds thro' this ruined heart, where all lies dead--
Wakening the echoes of joy long fled!

       *       *       *       *       *

  Of many a stanza, this alone
Had 'scaped oblivion--like the one
Stray fragment of a wreck which thrown
With the lost vessel's name ashore
Tells who they were that live no more.
  When thus the heart is in a vein
Of tender thought, the simplest strain
Can touch it with peculiar power--
  As when the air is warm, the scent
Of the most wild and rustic flower
  Can fill the whole rich element--
And in such moods the homeliest tone
That's linked with feelings, once our own--
With friends or joy gone by--will be
Worth choirs of loftiest harmony!

But some there were among the group
  Of damsels there too light of heart
To let their spirits longer droop,
  Even under music's melting art;
And one upspringing with a bound
From a low bank of flowers, looked round
With eyes that tho' so full of light
  Had still a trembling tear within;
And, while her fingers in swift flight
  Flew o'er a fairy mandolin,
Thus sung the song her lover late
  Had sung to her--the eve before
  That joyous night, when as of yore
All Zea met to celebrate
  The feast of May on the sea-shore.


SONG.


When the Balaika[7]
  Is heard o'er the sea,
I'll dance the Romaika
  By moonlight with thee.
If waves then advancing
  Should steal on our play,
Thy white feet in dancing
  Shall chase them away.[8]
When the Balaika
  Is heard o'er the sea,
Thou'lt dance the Romaika
  My own love, with me.

Then at the closing
  Of each merry lay,
How sweet 'tis, reposing
  Beneath the night ray!
Or if declining
  The moon leave the skies,
We'll talk by the shining
  Of each other's eyes.

Oh then how featly
  The dance we'll renew,
Treading so fleetly
  Its light mazes thro':[9]
Till stars, looking o'er us
  From heaven's high bowers,
Would change their bright chorus
  For one dance of ours!
When the Balaika
  Is heard o'er the sea,
Thou'lt dance the Romaika,
  My own love, with me.

       *       *       *       *       *

How changingly for ever veers
The heart of youth 'twixt smiles and tears!
Even as in April the light vane
Now points to sunshine, now to rain.
Instant this lively lay dispelled
  The shadow from each blooming brow,
And Dancing, joyous Dancing, held
  Full empire o'er each fancy now.


But say--_what_ shall the measure be?
  "Shall we the old Romaika tread,"
(Some eager asked) "as anciently
  "'Twas by the maids of Delos led,
"When slow at first, then circling fast,
"As the gay spirits rose--at last,
"With hand in hand like links enlocked,
  "Thro' the light air they seemed to flit
"In labyrinthine maze, that mocked
  "The dazzled eye that followed it?"
Some called aloud "the Fountain Dance!"--
  While one young, dark-eyed Amazon,
Whose step was air-like and whose glance
  Flashed, like a sabre in the sun,
Sportively said, "Shame on these soft
  "And languid strains we hear so oft.
"Daughters of Freedom! have not we
  "Learned from our lovers and our sires
"The Dance of Greece, while Greece was free--
  "That Dance, where neither flutes nor lyres,
"But sword and shield clash on the ear
"A music tyrants quake to hear?
"Heroines of Zea, arm with me
"And dance the dance of Victory!"

Thus saying, she, with playful grace,
Loosed the wide hat, that o'er her face
(From Anatolia came the maid)
  Hung shadowing each sunny charm;
And with a fair young armorer's aid,
  Fixing it on her rounded arm,
A mimic shield with pride displayed;
Then, springing towards a grove that spread
  Its canopy of foliage near,
Plucked off a lance-like twig, and said,
  "To arms, to arms!" while o'er her head
  She waved the light branch, as a spear.

Promptly the laughing maidens all
Obeyed their Chief's heroic call;--
Round the shield-arm of each was tied
  Hat, turban, shawl, as chance might be;
  The grove, their verdant armory,
Falchion and lance[10] alike supplied;
  And as their glossy locks, let free,
  Fell down their shoulders carelessly,
You might have dreamed you saw a throng
  Of youthful Thyads, by the beam
Of a May moon, bounding along
  Peneus' silver-eddied stream!

And now they stept, with measured tread,
  Martially o'er the shining field;
Now to the mimic combat led
(A heroine at each squadron's head),
  Struck lance to lance and sword to shield:
While still, thro' every varying feat,
Their voices heard in contrast sweet
With some of deep but softened sound
From lips of aged sires around,
Who smiling watched their children's play--
Thus sung the ancient Pyrrhic lay:--


SONG.


"Raise the buckler--poise the lance--
"Now here--now there--retreat--advance!"

Such were the sounds to which the warrior boy
  Danced in those happy days when Greece was free;
When Sparta's youth, even in the hour of joy,
  Thus trained their steps to war and victory.
"Raise the buckler--poise the lance--
"Now here--now there--retreat--advance!"
Such was the Spartan warriors' dance.
  "Grasp the falchion--gird the shield--
"Attack--defend--do all but yield."

Thus did thy sons, oh Greece, one glorious night,
  Dance by a moon like this, till o'er the sea
That morning dawned by whose immortal light
  They nobly died for thee and liberty![11]
"Raise the buckler--poise the lance--
"Now here--now there--retreat--advance!"
Such was the Spartan heroes' dance.

       *       *       *       *       *

Scarce had they closed this martial lay
When, flinging their light spears away,
The combatants, in broken ranks.
  All breathless from the war-field fly;
And down upon the velvet banks
  And flowery slopes exhausted lie,
Like rosy huntresses of Thrace,
Resting at sunset from the chase.

"Fond girls!" an aged Zean said--
One who himself had fought and bled,
And now with feelings half delight,
Half sadness, watched their mimic fight--
"Fond maids! who thus with War can jest--
"Like Love in Mar's helmet drest,
"When, in his childish innocence,
  "Pleased with the shade that helmet flings,
"He thinks not of the blood that thence
  "Is dropping o'er his snowy wings.
"Ay--true it is, young patriot maids,
  "If Honor's arm still won the fray,
"If luck but shone on righteous blades,
  "War were a game for gods to play!
"But, no, alas!--hear one, who well
  "Hath tracked the fortunes of the brave--
"Hear _me_, in mournful ditty, tell
  "What glory waits the patriot's grave."


SONG.


As by the shore, at break of day,
A vanquished chief expiring lay.
Upon the sands, with broken sword,
  He traced his farewell to the Free;
And, there, the last unfinished word
  He dying wrote was "Liberty!"

At night a Sea-bird shrieked the knell
Of him who thus for Freedom fell;
The words he wrote, ere evening came,
  Were covered by the sounding sea;--
So pass away the cause and name
  Of him who dies for Liberty!

       *       *       *       *       *

That tribute of subdued applause
  A charmed but timid audience pays,
That murmur which a minstrel draws
  From hearts that feel but fear to praise,
Followed this song, and left a pause
Of silence after it, that hung
Like a fixt spell on every tongue.

  At length a low and tremulous sound
Was heard from midst a group that round
A bashful maiden stood to hide
Her blushes while the lute she tried--
Like roses gathering round to veil
The song of some young nightingale,
Whose trembling notes steal out between
The clustered leaves, herself unseen.
And while that voice in tones that more
  Thro' feeling than thro' weakness erred,
Came with a stronger sweetness o'er
  The attentive ear, this strain was heard:--


SONG.


I saw from yonder silent cave,[12]
  Two Fountains running side by side;
The one was Memory's limpid wave,
  The other cold Oblivion's tide.
"Oh Love!" said I, in thoughtless mood,
  As deep I drank of Lethe's stream,
"Be all my sorrows in this flood
  "Forgotten like a vanisht dream!"

But who could bear that gloomy blank
  Where joy was lost as well as pain?
Quickly of Memory's fount I drank.
  And brought the past all back again;
And said, "Oh Love! whate'er my lot,
  "Still let this soul to thee be true--
"Rather than have one bliss forgot,
  "Be all my pains remembered too!"

      *      *      *      *      *

The group that stood around to shade
The blushes of that bashful maid,
Had by degrees as came the lay
More strongly forth retired away,
Like a fair shell whose valves divide
To show the fairer pearl inside:
For such she was--a creature, bright
  And delicate as those day-flowers,
Which while they last make up in light
  And sweetness what they want in hours.

  So rich upon the ear had grown
Her voice's melody--its tone
Gathering new courage as it found
An echo in each bosom round--
That, ere the nymph with downcast eye
Still on the chords, her lute laid by,
"Another song," all lips exclaimed,
And each some matchless favorite named;
while blushing as her fingers ran
O'er the sweet chords she thus began:--


SONG.


Oh, Memory, how coldly
  Thou paintest joy gone by:
Like rainbows, thy pictures
  But mournfully shine and die.
Or if some tints thou keepest
  That former days recall,
As o'er each line thou weepest,
  Thy tears efface them all.

But, Memory, too truly
  Thou paintest grief that's past;
Joy's colors are fleeting,
  But those of Sorrow last.
And, while thou bringst before us
  Dark pictures of past ill,
Life's evening closing o'er us
  But makes them darker still.

       *       *       *       *       *

So went the moonlight hours along,
In this sweet glade; and so with song
And witching sounds--not such as they,
 The cymbalists of Ossa, played,
To chase the moon's eclipse away,[13]
  But soft and holy--did each maid
Lighten her heart's eclipse awhile,
And win back Sorrow to a smile.

Not far from this secluded place,
  On the sea-shore a ruin stood;--
A relic of the extinguisht race,
  Who once o'er that foamy flood,
  When fair Ioulis[14] by the light
  Of golden sunset on the sight
    Of mariners who sailed that sea,
  Rose like a city of chrysolite
    Called from the wave by witchery.
  This ruin--now by barbarous hands
    Debased into a motley shed,
  Where the once splendid column stands
    Inverted on its leafy head--
  Formed, as they tell in times of old
    The dwelling of that bard whose lay
  Could melt to tears the stern and cold,
    And sadden mid their mirth the gay--
  Simonides,[15] whose fame thro' years
    And ages past still bright appears--
  Like Hesperus, a star of tears!

  'Twas hither now--to catch a view
    Of the white waters as they played
  Silently in the light--a few
    Of the more restless damsels strayed;
  And some would linger mid the scent
    Of hanging foliage that perfumed
  The ruined walls; while others went
    Culling whatever floweret bloomed

In the lone leafy space between,
Where gilded chambers once had been;
Or, turning sadly to the sea,
  Sent o'er the wave a sigh unblest
To some brave champion of the Free--
Thinking, alas, how cold might be
  At that still hour his place of rest!

Meanwhile there came a sound of song
  From the dark ruins--a faint strain,
As if some echo that among
Those minstrel halls had slumbered long
  Were murmuring into life again.

But, no--the nymphs knew well the tone--
  A maiden of their train, who loved
Like the night-bird to sing alone.
  Had deep into those ruins roved,
And there, all other thoughts forgot,
  Was warbling o'er, in lone delight,
A lay that, on that very spot,
  Her lover sung one moonlight night:--


SONG.


Ah! where are they, who heard, in former hours,
The voice of Song in these neglected bowers?
  They are gone--all gone!

The youth who told his pain in such sweet tone
That all who heard him wisht his pain their own--
  He is gone--he is gone!

And she who while he sung sat listening by
And thought to strains like these 'twere sweet to die--
  She is gone--she too is gone!

'Tis thus in future hours some bard will say
Of her who hears and him who sings this lay--
  They are gone--they both are gone!

       *       *       *       *       *

The moon was now, from heaven's steep,
  Bending to dip her silvery urn
Into the bright and silent deep--
  And the young nymphs, on their return
From those romantic ruins, found
Their other playmates ranged around
The sacred Spring, prepared to tune
Their parting hymn,[16] ere sunk the moon,
To that fair Fountain by whose stream
Their hearts had formed so many a dream.

  Who has not read the tales that tell
Of old Eleusis' sacred Well,
Or heard what legend-songs recount
Of Syra and its holy Fount,[17]
Gushing at once from the hard rock
  Into the laps of living flowers--
Where village maidens loved to flock,
  On summer-nights and like the Hours
Linked in harmonious dance and song,
Charmed the unconscious night along;
While holy pilgrims on their way
  To Delos' isle stood looking on,
Enchanted with a scene so gay,
  Nor sought their boats till morning shone.

Such was the scene this lovely glade
And its fair inmates now displayed.
As round the Fount in linked ring
  They went in cadence slow and light
And thus to that enchanted Spring
  Warbled their Farewell for the night:--


SONG.


Here, while the moonlight dim
Falls on that mossy brim,
Sing we our Fountain Hymn,
  Maidens of Zea!
Nothing but Music's strain,
When Lovers part in pain,
Soothes till they meet again,
  Oh, Maids of Zea!

Bright Fount so clear and cold
Round which the nymphs of old
Stood with their locks of gold,
  Fountain of Zea!
Not even Castaly,
Famed tho' its streamlet be,
Murmurs or shines like thee,
  Oh, Fount of Zea!

Thou, while our hymn we sing,
Thy silver voice shalt bring,
Answering, answering,
  Sweet Fount of Zea!
For of all rills that run
Sparkling by moon or sun
Thou art the fairest one,
  Bright Fount of Zea!

Now, by those stars that glance
Over heaven's still expanse
Weave we our mirthful dance,
  Daughters of Zea!
Such as in former days
Danced they by Dian's rays
Where the Eurotas strays,
  Oh, Maids of Zea!

But when to merry feet
Hearts with no echo beat,
Say, can the dance be sweet?
  Maidens of Zea!
No, naught but Music's strain,
When lovers part in pain,
Soothes till they meet again,
  Oh, Maids of Zea!




SECOND EVENING.


SONG.


When evening shades are falling
  O'er Ocean's sunny sleep,
To pilgrims' hearts recalling
  Their home beyond the deep;
When rest o'er all descending
  The shores with gladness smile,
And lutes their echoes blending
  Are heard from isle to isle,
Then, Mary, Star of the Sea,
We pray, we pray, to thee!

The noon-day tempest over,
  Now Ocean toils no more,
And wings of halcyons hover
  Where all was strife before.
Oh thus may life in closing
  Its short tempestuous day
Beneath heaven's smile reposing
  Shine all its storms away:
Thus, Mary, Star of the Sea,
We pray, we pray, to thee!

On Helle's sea the light grew dim
As the last sounds of that sweet hymn
  Floated along its azure tide--
Floated in light as if the lay
Had mixt with sunset's fading ray
  And light and song together died.
So soft thro' evening's air had breathed
That choir of youthful voices wreathed
In many-linked harmony,
That boats then hurrying o'er the sea
Paused when they reached this fairy shore,
And lingered till the strain was o'er.

Of those young maids who've met to fleet
In song and dance this evening's hours,
Far happier now the bosoms beat
  Than when they last adorned these bowers;
For tidings of glad sound had come,
  At break of day from the far isles--
Tidings like breath of life to some--
That Zea's sons would soon wing home,
  Crowded with the light of Victory's smiles
To meet that brightest of all meeds
That wait on high, heroic deeds.
When gentle eyes that scarce for tears
  Could trace the warrior's parting track,
Shall like a misty morn that clears
When the long-absent sun appears
  Shine out all bliss to hail him back.

How fickle still the youthful breast!--
  More fond of change than a young moon,
No joy so new was e'er possest
  But Youth would leave for newer soon.
These Zean nymphs tho' bright the spot
  Where first they held their evening play
As ever fell to fairy's lot
  To wanton o'er by midnight's ray,
Had now exchanged that sheltered scene
  For a wide glade beside the sea--
A lawn whose soft expanse of green
  Turned to the west sun smilingly
As tho' in conscious beauty bright
It joyed to give him light for light.

And ne'er did evening more serene
Look down from heaven on lovelier scene.
Calm lay the flood around while fleet
  O'er the blue shining element
Light barks as if with fairy feet
  That stirred not the husht waters went;
Some, that ere rosy eve fell o'er
  The blushing wave, with mainsail free,
Had put forth from the Attic shore,
  Or the near Isle of Ebony;--
Some, Hydriot barks that deep in caves
  Beneath Colonna's pillared cliffs,
Had all day lurked and o'er the waves
  Now shot their long and dart-like skiffs.
Woe to the craft however fleet
These sea-hawks in their course shall meet,
Laden with juice of Lesbian vines,
Or rich from Naxos' emery mines;
For not more sure, when owlets flee
O'er the dark crags of Pendelee,
Doth the night-falcon mark his prey,
Or pounce on it more fleet than they.

And what a moon now lights the glade
  Where these young island nymphs are met!
Full-orbed yet pure as if no shade
  Had touched its virgin lustre yet;
And freshly bright as if just made
By Love's own hands of new-born light
Stolen from his mother's star tonight.

  On a bold rock that o'er the flood
Jutted from that soft glade there stood
A Chapel, fronting towards the sea,--
Built in some by-gone century,--
Where nightly as the seaman's mark
When waves rose high or clouds were dark,
A lamp bequeathed by some kind Saint
Shed o'er the wave its glimmer faint.
Waking in way-worn men a sigh
And prayer to heaven as they went by.
'Twas there, around that rock-built shrine
  A group of maidens and their sires
Had stood to watch the day's decline,
  And as the light fell o'er their lyres
Sung to the Queen-Star of the Sea
That soft and holy melody.

But lighter thoughts and lighter song
Now woo the coming hours along.
For mark, where smooth the herbage lies,
  Yon gay pavilion curtained deep
With silken folds thro' which bright eyes
  From time to time are seen to peep;
While twinkling lights that to and fro
Beneath those veils like meteors go,
  Tell of some spells at work and keep
Young fancies chained in mute suspense,
Watching what next may shine from thence,
Nor long the pause ere hands unseen
  That mystic curtain backward drew,
And all that late but shone between
  In half-caught gleams now burst to view.

A picture 'twas of the early days
Of glorious Greece ere yet those rays
Of rich, immortal Mind were hers
That made mankind her worshippers;
While yet unsung her landscapes shone
With glory lent by heaven alone;
Nor temples crowned her nameless hills,
Nor Muse immortalized her rills;
Nor aught but the mute poesy
Of sun and stars and shining sea
Illumed that land of bards to be.
While prescient of the gifted race
  That yet would realm so blest adorn,
Nature took pains to deck the place
  Where glorious Art was to be born.

Such was the scene that mimic stage
  Of Athens and her hills portrayed
Athens in her first, youthful age,
  Ere yet the simple violet braid,[18]
Which then adorned her had shone down
The glory of earth's loftiest crown.
While yet undreamed, her seeds of Art
  Lay sleeping in the marble mine--
Sleeping till Genius bade them start
  To all but life in shapes divine;
Till deified the quarry shone
And all Olympus stood in stone!

There in the foreground of that scene,
On a soft bank of living green
Sate a young nymph with her lap full
  Of the newly gathered flowers, o'er which
She graceful leaned intent to cull
  All that was there of hue most rich,
To form a wreath such as the eye
Of her young lover who stood by,
With pallet mingled fresh might choose
To fix by Painting's rainbow hues.

The wreath was formed; the maiden raised
  Her speaking eyes to his, while he--
Oh _not_ upon the flowers now gazed,
  But on that bright look's witchery.
While, quick as if but then the thought
Like light had reached his soul, he caught
His pencil up and warm and true
As life itself that love-look drew:
And, as his raptured task went on,
And forth each kindling feature shone,
Sweet voices thro' the moonlight air
  From lips as moonlight fresh and pure
Thus hailed the bright dream passing there,
  And sung the Birth of Portraiture.[19]


SONG.


As once a Grecian maiden wove
  Her garland mid the summer bowers,
There stood a youth with eyes of love
  To watch her while she wreathed the flowers.
The youth was skilled in Painting's art,
  But ne'er had studied woman's brow,
Nor knew what magic hues the heart
  Can shed o'er Nature's charms till now.


CHORUS.


Blest be Love to whom we owe
All that's fair and bright below.

His hand had pictured many a rose
  And sketched the rays that light the brook;
But what were these or what were those
  To woman's blush, to woman's look?
"Oh, if such magic power there be,
  "This, this," he cried, "is all my prayer,
"To paint that living light I see
  "And fix the soul that sparkles there."

His prayer as soon as breathed was heard;
  His pallet touched by Love grew warm,
And Painting saw her hues transferred
  From lifeless flowers to woman's form.
Still as from tint to tint he stole,
  The fair design shone out the more,
And there was now a life, a soul,
  Where only colors glowed before.

Then first carnations learned to speak
  And lilies into life were brought;
While mantling on the maiden's cheek
  Young roses kindled into thought.
Then hyacinths their darkest dyes
  Upon the locks of Beauty threw;
And violets transformed to eyes
  Inshrined a soul within their blue.


CHORUS.


Blest be Love to whom we owe,
All that's fair and bright below.
Song was cold and Painting dim
Till Song and Painting learned from him.

       *       *       *       *       *

Soon as the scene had closed, a cheer
  Of gentle voices old and young
Rose from the groups that stood to hear
  This tale of yore so aptly sung;
And while some nymphs in haste to tell
The workers of that fairy spell
How crowned with praise their task had been
Stole in behind the curtained scene,
The rest in happy converse strayed--
  Talking that ancient love-tale o'er--
Some to the groves that skirt the glade,
  Some to the chapel by the shore,
To look what lights were on the sea.
And think of the absent silently.

But soon that summons known so well
  Thro' bower and hall in Eastern lands,
Whose sound more sure than gong or bell
  Lovers and slaves alike commands,--
  The clapping of young female hands,
Calls back the groups from rock and field
To see some new-formed scene revealed;--
And fleet and eager down the slopes
Of the green glades like antelopes
When in their thirst they hear the sound
Of distant rills, the light nymphs bound.

Far different now the scene--a waste
  Of Libyan sands, by moonlight's ray;
An ancient well, whereon were traced
  The warning words, for such as stray
  Unarmed there, "Drink and away!"[20]
While near it from the night-ray screened,
  And like his bells in husht repose,
A camel slept--young as if weaned
  When last the star Canopus rose.[21]

Such was the back-ground's silent scene;--
  While nearer lay fast slumbering too
In a rude tent with brow serene
  A youth whose cheeks of wayworn hue
And pilgrim-bonnet told the tale
That he had been to Mecca's Vale:
Haply in pleasant dreams, even now
  Thinking the long wished hour is come
  When o'er the well-known porch at home
His hand shall hang the aloe bough--
Trophy of his accomplished vow.[22]

But brief his dream--for now the call
  Of the camp-chiefs from rear to van,
  "Bind on your burdens,"[23] wakes up all
  The widely slumbering caravan;
And thus meanwhile to greet the ear
  Of the young pilgrim as he wakes,
The song of one who lingering near
  Had watched his slumber, cheerly breaks.


SONG.


Up and march! the timbrel's sound
Wakes the slumbering camp around;
Fleet thy hour of rest hath gone,
Armed sleeper, up, and on!
Long and weary is our way
O'er the burning sands to-day;
But to pilgrim's homeward feet
Even the desert's path is sweet.

When we lie at dead of night,
Looking up to heaven's light,
Hearing but the watchmans tone
Faintly chanting "God is one,"[24]
Oh what thoughts then o'er us come
Of our distant village home,
Where that chant when evening sets
Sounds from all the minarets.

Cheer thee!--soon shall signal lights,
Kindling o'er the Red Sea heights,
Kindling quick from man to man,
Hail our coming caravan:[25]
Think what bliss that hour will be!
Looks of home again to see,
And our names again to hear
Murmured out by voices dear.

       *        *        *        *        *

So past the desert dream away,
Fleeting as his who heard this lay,
Nor long the pause between, nor moved
   The spell-bound audience from that spot;
While still as usual Fancy roved
   On to the joy that yet was not;--
Fancy who hath no present home,
But builds her bower in scenes to come,
Walking for ever in a light
That flows from regions out of sight.

But see by gradual dawn descried
   A mountain realm-rugged as e'er
   Upraised to heaven its summits bare,
Or told to earth with frown of pride
   That Freedom's falcon nest was there,
Too high for hand of lord or king
To hood her brow, or chain her wing.

'Tis Maina's land--her ancient hills,
The abode of nymphs--her countless rills
And torrents in their downward dash
   Shining like silver thro' the shade
Of the sea-pine and flowering ash--
   All with a truth so fresh portrayed
As wants but touch of life to be
A world of warm reality.

And now light bounding forth a band
   Of mountaineers, all smiles, advance--
Nymphs with their lovers hand in hand
Linked in the Ariadne dance;
And while, apart from that gay throng,
A minstrel youth in varied song
Tells of the loves, the joys, the ills
Of these wild children of the hills,
The rest by turns or fierce or gay
As war or sport inspires the lay
Follow each change that wakes the strings
And act what thus the lyrist sings:--


SONG.


No life is like the mountaineer's,
His home is near the sky,
Where throned above this world he hears
  Its strife at distance die,
Or should the sound of hostile drum
Proclaim below, "We come--we come,"
Each crag that towers in air
Gives answer, "Come who dare!"
While like bees from dell and dingle,
Swift the swarming warriors mingle,
And their cry "Hurra!" will be,
"Hurra, to victory!"

Then when battle's hour is over
See the happy mountain lover
With the nymph who'll soon be bride
Seated blushing by his side,--
Every shadow of his lot
In her sunny smile forgot.
Oh, no life is like the mountaineer's.
  His home is near the sky,
Where throned above this world he hears
  Its strife at distance die.
Nor only thus thro' summer suns
His blithe existence cheerly runs--
  Even winter bleak and dim
  Brings joyous hours to him;
When his rifle behind him flinging
He watches the roe-buck springing,
And away, o'er the hills away
Re-echoes his glad "hurra."

Then how blest when night is closing,
By the kindled hearth reposing,
To his rebeck's drowsy song,
He beguiles the hour along;
Or provoked by merry glances
To a brisker movement dances,
Till, weary at last, in slumber's chain,
He dreams o'er chase and dance again,
  Dreams, dreams them o'er again.

        *        *        *        *        *

As slow that minstrel at the close
Sunk while he sung to feigned repose,
Aptly did they whose mimic art
  Followed the changes of his lay
Portray the lull, the nod, the start,
  Thro' which as faintly died away
His lute and voice, the minstrel past,
Till voice and lute lay husht at last.

But now far other song came o'er
  Their startled ears--song that at first
As solemnly the night-wind bore
  Across the wave its mournful burst,
Seemed to the fancy like a dirge
  Of some lone Spirit of the Sea,
Singing o'er Helle's ancient surge
  The requiem of her Brave and Free.

Sudden amid their pastime pause
  The wondering nymphs; and as the sound
Of that strange music nearer draws,
  With mute inquiring eye look round,
Asking each other what can be
The source of this sad minstrelsy?
Nor longer can they doubt, the song
  Comes from some island-bark which now
Courses the bright waves swift along
And soon perhaps beneath the brow
Of the Saint's Bock will shoot its prow.

Instantly all with hearts that sighed
  'Twixt fear's and fancy's influence,
  Flew to the rock and saw from thence
A red-sailed pinnace towards them glide,
Whose shadow as it swept the spray
Scattered the moonlight's smiles away.
Soon as the mariners saw that throng
  From the cliff gazing, young and old,
Sudden they slacked their sail and song,
  And while their pinnace idly rolled
  On the light surge, these tidings told:--

'Twas from an isle of mournful name,
From Missolonghi, last they came--
Sad Missolonghi sorrowing yet
O'er him, the noblest Star of Fame
  That e'er in life's young glory set!--
And now were on their mournful way,
  Wafting the news thro' Helle's isles;--
News that would cloud even Freedom's ray
  And sadden Victory mid her smiles.

Their tale thus told and heard with pain,
Out spread the galliot's wings again;
And as she sped her swift career
Again that Hymn rose on the ear--
"Thou art not dead--thou art not dead!"
  As oft 'twas sung in ages flown
Of him, the Athenian, who to shed
  A tyrant's blood poured out his own.


SONG.


Thou art not dead--thou art not dead!
  No, dearest Harmodius, no.
Thy soul to realms above us fled
Tho' like a star it dwells o'er head
Still lights this world below.
Thou art _not_ dead--thou art not dead!
  No, dearest Harmodius, no.

Thro' isles of light where heroes tread
  And flowers ethereal blow,
Thy god-like Spirit now is led,
Thy lip with life ambrosial fed
Forgets all taste of woe.
Thou art not dead--thou art not dead!
  No, dearest Harmodius, no.

The myrtle round that falchion spread
  Which struck the immortal blow,
Throughout all time with leaves unshed--
The patriot's hope, the tyrant's dread--
  Round Freedom's shrine shall grow.
Thou art not dead--thou art not dead!
  No, dearest Harmodius, no.

Where hearts like thine have broke or bled,
  Tho' quenched the vital glow,
Their memory lights a flame instead,
Which even from out the narrow bed
  Of death its beams shall throw.
Thou art not dead--thou art not dead!
  No, dearest Harmodius, no.

Thy name, by myriads sung and said,
  From age to age shall go,
Long as the oak and ivy wed,
As bees shall haunt Hymettus' head,
  Or Helle's waters flow.
Thou art not dead--thou art not dead!
  No, dearest Harmodius, no.

       *       *       *       *       *

'Mong those who lingered listening there,--
  Listening with ear and eye as long
As breath of night could towards them bear
  A murmur of that mournful song,--
A few there were in whom the lay
  Had called up feelings far too sad
To pass with the brief strain away,
  Or turn at once to theme more glad;
And who in mood untuned to meet
  The light laugh of the happie train,
Wandered to seek some moonlight seat
Where they might rest, in converse sweet,
  Till vanisht smiles should come again.

And seldom e'er hath noon of night
To sadness lent more soothing light.
On one side in the dark blue sky
Lonely and radiant was the eye
Of Jove himself, while on the other
  'Mong tiny stars that round her gleamed,
The young moon like the Roman mother
  Among her living "jewels" beamed.

Touched by the lovely scenes around,
  A pensive maid--one who, tho' young,
Had known what 'twas to see unwound
  The ties by which her heart had clung--
Wakened her soft tamboura's sound,
  And to its faint accords thus sung:--


SONG.


  Calm as beneath its mother's eyes
  In sleep the smiling infant lies,
  So watched by all the stars of night
  Yon landscape sleeps in light.
And while the night-breeze dies away,
  Like relics of some faded strain,
Loved voices, lost for many a day,
  Seem whispering round again.
Oh youth! oh love! ye dreams that shed
Such glory once--where are ye fled?

Pure ray of light that down the sky
  Art pointing like an angel's wand,
As if to guide to realms that lie
  In that bright sea beyond:
Who knows but in some brighter deep
  Than even that tranquil, moonlit main,
Some land may lie where those who weep
  Shall wake to smile again!
With cheeks that had regained their power
  And play of smiles,--and each bright eye
Like violets after morning's shower
  The brighter for the tears gone by,
Back to the scene such smiles should grace
These wandering nymphs their path retrace,
And reach the spot with rapture new
Just as the veils asunder flew
And a fresh vision burst to view.

There by her own bright Attic flood,
The blue-eyed Queen of Wisdom stood;--
Not as she haunts the sage's dreams,
  With brow unveiled, divine, severe;
But softened as on bards she beams
  When fresh from Poesy's high sphere
A music not her own she brings,
And thro' the veil which Fancy flings
O'er her stern features gently sings.

But who is he--that urchin nigh,
  With quiver on the rose-trees hung,
Who seems just dropt from yonder sky,
And stands to watch that maid with eye
  So full of thought for one so young?--
That child--but, silence! lend thine ear,
And thus in song the tale thou'lt hear:--


SONG.


As Love one summer eve was straying,
  Who should he see at that soft hour
But young Minerva gravely playing
Her flute within an olive bower.
I need not say, 'tis Love's opinion
  That grave or merry, good or ill,
The sex all bow to his dominion,
  As woman will be woman still.

Tho' seldom yet the boy hath given
  To learned dames his smiles or sighs,
So handsome Pallas looked that even
  Love quite forgot the maid was wise.
Besides, a youth of his discerning
  Knew well that by a shady rill
At sunset hour whate'er her learning
  A woman will be woman still.

Her flute he praised in terms extatic,--
  Wishing it dumb, nor cared how soon.--
For Wisdom's notes, howe'er chromatic,
  To Love seem always out of tune.
But long as he found face to flatter,
  The nymph found breath to shake and thrill;
As, weak or wise--it doesn't matter--
Woman at heart is woman still.

Love changed his plan, with warmth exclaiming,
  "How rosy was her lips' soft dye!"
And much that flute the flatterer blaming,
  For twisting lips so sweet awry.
The nymph looked down, beheld her features
  Reflected in the passing rill,
And started, shocked--for, ah, ye creatures!
  Even when divine you're women still.

Quick from the lips it made so odious.
  That graceless flute the Goddess took
And while yet filled with breath melodious,
  Flung it into the glassy brook;
Where as its vocal life was fleeting
  Adown the current, faint and shrill,
'Twas heard in plaintive tone repeating,
  "Woman, alas, vain woman still!"

       *       *       *       *       *

An interval of dark repose--
Such as the summer lightning knows,
Twixt flash and flash, as still more bright
  The quick revealment comes and goes,
Opening each time the veils of night,
To show within a world of light--
Such pause, so brief, now past between
This last gay vision and the scene
  Which now its depth of light disclosed.
A bower it seemed, an Indian bower,
  Within whose shade a nymph reposed,
Sleeping away noon's sunny hour--
Lovely as she, the Sprite, who weaves
Her mansion of sweet Durva leaves,
And there, as Indian legends say,
Dreams the long summer hours away.
And mark how charmed this sleeper seems
With some hid fancy--she, too, dreams!
Oh for a wizard's art to tell
  The wonders that now bless her sight!
'Tis done--a truer, holier spell
Than e'er from wizard's lip yet fell.
  Thus brings her vision all to light:--


SONG.


"Who comes so gracefully
  "Gliding along
"While the blue rivulet
  "Sleeps to her song;
"Song richly vying
"With the faint sighing
"Which swans in dying
  "Sweetly prolong?"

So sung the shepherd-boy
  By the stream's side,
Watching that fairy-boat
  Down the flood glide,
Like a bird winging,
Thro' the waves bringing
That Syren, singing
  To the husht tide.

"Stay," said the shepherd-boy,
"Fairy-boat, stay,
"Linger, sweet minstrelsy,
  "Linger a day."
But vain his pleading,
Past him, unheeding,
Song and boat, speeding,
  Glided away.

So to our youthful eyes
  Joy and hope shone;
So while we gazed on them
  Fast they flew on;--
Like flowers declining
Even in the twining,
One moment shining.
  And the next gone!

       *       *       *       *       *

Soon as the imagined dream went by,
Uprose the nymph, with anxious eye
Turned to the clouds as tho' some boon
She waited from that sun-bright dome,
And marvelled that it came not soon
As her young thoughts would have it come.

But joy is in her glance!--the wing
  Of a white bird is seen above;
And oh, if round his neck he bring
  The long-wished tidings from her love,
Not half so precious in her eyes
  Even that high-omened bird[26] would be.
Who dooms the brow o'er which he flies
  To wear a crown of royalty.

She had herself last evening sent
  A winged messenger whose flight
Thro' the clear, roseate element,
  She watched till lessening out of sight
Far to the golden West it went,
Wafting to him, her distant love,
  A missive in that language wrought
Which flowers can speak when aptly wove,
  Each hue a word, each leaf a thought.

And now--oh speed of pinion, known
To Love's light messengers alone I--
Ere yet another evening takes
Its farewell of the golden lakes,
She sees another envoy fly,
With the wished answer, thro' the sky.


SONG.


Welcome sweet bird, thro' the sunny air winging,
  Swift hast thou come o'er the far-shining sea,
Like Seba's dove on thy snowy neck bringing
  Love's written vows from my lover to me.
Oh, in thy absence what hours did I number!--
  Saying oft, "Idle bird, how could he rest?"
But thou art come at last, take now thy slumber,
  And lull thee in dreams of all thou lov'st best.

Yet dost thou droop--even now while I utter
  Love's happy welcome, thy pulse dies away;
Cheer thee, my bird--were it life's ebbing flutter.
  This fondling bosom should woo it to stay,
But no--thou'rt dying--thy last task is over--
  Farewell, sweet martyr to Love and to me!
The smiles thou hast wakened by news from my lover,
  Will now all be turned into weeping for thee.

       *       *       *       *       *

While thus this scene of song (their last
For the sweet summer season) past,
A few presiding nymphs whose care
  Watched over all invisibly,
As do those guardian sprites of air
  Whose watch we feel but cannot see,
Had from the circle--scarcely missed,
  Ere they were sparkling there again--
Glided like fairies to assist
  Their handmaids on the moonlight plain,
Where, hid by intercepting shade
  From the stray glance of curious eyes,
A feast of fruits and wines was laid--
  Soon to shine out, a glad surprise!

And now the moon, her ark of light
  Steering thro' Heaven, as tho' she bore
In safety thro' that deep of night
Spirits of earth, the good, the bright,
  To some remote immortal shore,
Had half-way sped her glorious way,
  When round reclined on hillocks green
In groups beneath that tranquil ray,
  The Zeans at their feast were seen.
Gay was the picture--every maid
Whom late the lighted scene displayed,
Still in her fancy garb arrayed;--
The Arabian pilgrim, smiling here
  Beside the nymph of India's sky;
While there the Mainiote mountaineer
Whispered in young Minerva's ear,
  And urchin Love stood laughing by.

Meantime the elders round the board,
  By mirth and wit themselves made young,
High cups of juice Zacynthian poured,
  And while the flask went round thus sung:--


SONG.


Up with the sparkling brimmer,
  Up to the crystal rim;
Let not a moonbeam glimmer
  'Twixt the flood and brim.
When hath the world set eyes on
  Aught to match this light,
Which o'er our cup's horizon
  Dawns in bumpers bright?

Truth in a deep well lieth--
  So the wise aver;
But Truth the fact denieth--
  Water suits not her.
No, her abode's in brimmers,
  Like this mighty cup--
Waiting till we, good swimmers,
  Dive to bring her up.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thus circled round the song of glee,
  And all was tuneful mirth the while,
  Save on the cheeks of some whose smile
As fixt they gaze upon the sea,
Turns into paleness suddenly!
What see they there? a bright blue light
  That like a meteor gliding o'er
The distant wave grows on the sight,
As tho' 'twere winged to Zea's shore.
To some, 'mong those who came to gaze,
  It seemed the night-light far away
Of some lone fisher by the blaze
  Of pine torch luring on his prey;
While others, as 'twixt awe and mirth
  They breathed the blest Panaya's[27] name,
Vowed that such light was not of earth
  But of that drear, ill-omen'd flame
Which mariners see on sail or mast
When Death is coming in the blast.
While marvelling thus they stood, a maid
  Who sate apart with downcast eye,
Not yet had like the rest surveyed
  That coming light which now was nigh,
Soon as it met her sight, with cry
  Of pain-like joy, "'Tis he! 'tis he!"
Loud she exclaimed, and hurrying by
  The assembled throng, rushed towards the sea.
At burst so wild, alarmed, amazed,
All stood like statues mute and gazed
Into each other's eyes to seek
What meant such mood in maid so meek?

Till now, the tale was known to few,
But now from lip to lip it flew:--
A youth, the flower of all the band,
  Who late had left this sunny shore,
When last he kist that maiden's hand,
  Lingering to kiss it o'er and o'er.
By his sad brow too plainly told
  The ill-omened thought which crost him then,
That once those hands should lose their hold,
  They ne'er would meet on earth again!
In vain his mistress sad as he,
But with a heart from Self as free
As generous woman's only is,
Veiled her own fears to banish his:--
With frank rebuke but still more vain,
  Did a rough warrior who stood by
Call to his mind this martial strain,
  His favorite once, ere Beauty's eye
  Had taught his soldier-heart to sigh:--


SONG.


March! nor heed those arms that hold thee,
  Tho' so fondly close they come;
Closer still will they enfold thee
  When thou bring'st fresh laurels home.
Dost thou dote on woman's brow?
  Dost thou live but in her breath?
March!--one hour of victory now
 Wins thee woman's smile till death.

Oh what bliss when war is over
  Beauty's long-missed smile to meet.
And when wreaths our temples cover
  Lay them shining at her feet.
Who would not that hour to reach
  Breathe out life's expiring sigh,--
Proud as waves that on the beach
  Lay their war-crests down and die.

There! I see thy soul is burning--
  She herself who clasps thee so
Paints, even now, thy glad returning,
  And while clasping bids thee go.
One deep sigh to passion given,
  One last glowing tear and then--
March!--nor rest thy sword till Heaven
  Brings thee to those arms again.

       *       *       *       *       *

Even then ere loath their hands could part
  A promise the youth gave which bore
Some balm unto the maiden's heart,
  That, soon as the fierce fight was o'er,
To home he'd speed, if safe and free--
  Nay, even if dying, still would come,
So the blest word of "Victory!"
  Might be the last he'd breathe at home.
"By day," he cried, "thou'lt know my bark;
"But should I come thro' midnight dark,
"A blue light on the prow shall tell
"That Greece hath won and all is well!"

Fondly the maiden every night,
Had stolen to seek that promised light;
Nor long her eyes had now been turned
From watching when the signal burned.
Signal of joy--for her, for all--
  Fleetly the boat now nears the land,
While voices from the shore-edge call
  For tidings of the long-wished band.

Oh the blest hour when those who've been
  Thro' peril's paths by land or sea
Locked in our arms again are seen
  Smiling in glad security;
When heart to heart we fondly strain,
  Questioning quickly o'er and o'er--
Then hold them off to gaze affain
  And ask, tho' answered oft before,
  If they _indeed_ are ours once more?

Such is the scene so full of joy
Which welcomes now this warrior-boy,
As fathers, sisters, friends all run
Bounding to meet him--all but one
Who, slowest on his neck to fall,
Is yet the happiest of them all.

And now behold him circled round
  With beaming faces at that board,
While cups with laurel foliage crowned,
  Are to the coming warriors poured--
Coming, as he, their herald, told,
With blades from victory scarce yet cold,
With hearts untouched by Moslem steel
And wounds that home's sweet breath will heal.

"Ere morn," said he,--and while he spoke
  Turned to the east, where clear and pale
The star of dawn already broke--
  "We'll greet on yonder wave their sail!"
Then wherefore part? all, all agree
  To wait them here beneath this bower;
And thus, while even amidst their glee,
Each eye is turned to watch the sea,
  With song they cheer the anxious hour.


SONG.


"'Tis the Vine! 'tis the Vine!" said the cup-loving boy
As he saw it spring bright from the earth,
And called the young Genii of Wit, Love, and Joy,
  To witness and hallow its birth.
The fruit was full grown, like a ruby it flamed
  Till the sunbeam that kist it looked pale;
"'Tis the Vine! 'tis the Vine!" every Spirit exclaimed
  "Hail, hail to the Wine-tree, all hail!"

First, fleet as a bird to the summons Wit flew,
  While a light on the vine-leaves there broke
In flashes so quick and so brilliant all knew
  T'was the light from his lips as he spoke.
"Bright tree! let thy nectar but cheer me," he cried,
  "And the fount of Wit never can fail:"
"'Tis the Vine! 'tis the Vine!" hills and valleys reply,
  "Hail, hail to the Wine-tree, all hail!"

Next Love as he leaned o'er the plant to admire
  Each tendril and cluster it wore,
From his rosy mouth sent such a breath of desire,
  As made the tree tremble all o'er.
Oh! never did flower of the earth, sea, or sky,
  Such a soul-giving odor inhale:
"'Tis the Vine! 'tis the Vine!" all re-echo the cry,
  "Hail, hail to the Wine-tree, all hail!"

Last, Joy, without whom even Love and Wit die,
  Came to crown the bright hour with his ray;
And scarce had that mirth-waking tree met his eye,
  When a laugh spoke what Joy could not say;--
A laugh of the heart which was echoed around
  Till like music it swelled on the gale:
"T is the Vine! 'tis the Vine!" laughing myriads resound,
"Hail, hail to the Wine-tree, all hail!"


[1] "_Nerium Oleander_. In Cyprus it retains its ancient name,
Rhododaphne, and the Cypriots adorn their churches with the flowers on
feast-days."--_Journal of Dr. Sibthorpe, Walpole's, Turkey_.

[2] _Lonicera caprifolium_, used by the girls of Patmos for garlands.

[3] _Cuscuta europoea_. "From the twisting and twining of the stems, it is
compared by the Greeks to the dishevelled hair of the Nereids."--
_Walpole's Turkey_.

[4] "The produce of the island in these acorns alone amounts annually to
fifteen thousand quintals."--_Clarke's Travels_.

[5] Now Santa Maura--the island, from whose cliffs Sappho leaped into the
sea.

[6] "The precipice, which is fearfully dizzy, is about one hundred and
fourteen feet from the water, which is of a profound depth, as appears
from the dark blue color and the eddy that plays round the pointed and
projecting rocks."--_Goodisson's Ionian Isles_.

[7] This word is defrauded here, I suspect, of a syllable; Dr. Clarke, if
I recollect right, makes it "Balalaika."

[8] "I saw above thirty parties engaged in dancing the Romaika upon the
sand; in some of these groups, the girl who led them chased the retreating
wave."--Douglas on the Modern Greeks.

[9] "In dancing the Romaika [says Mr. Douglas] they begin in slow and
solemn step till they have gained the time, but by degrees the air becomes
more sprightly; the conductress of the dance sometimes setting to her
partners, sometimes darting before the rest, and leading them through the
most rapid revolutions: sometimes crossing under the hands, which are held
up to let her pass, and giving as much liveliness and intricacy as she can
to the figures, into which she conducts her companions, while their
business is to follow her in all her movements, without breaking the
chain, or losing the measure,"

[10] The sword was the weapon chiefly used in this dance.

[11] It is said that Leonidas and his companions employed themselves, on
the eve of the battle, in music and the gymnastic exercises of their
country.

[12] "This morning we paid our visit to the Cave of Trophonius, and the
Fountains of Memory and Oblivion, just upon the water of Hercyna, which
flows through stupendous rocks."--_Williams's Travels in Greece_.

[13] This superstitious custom of the Thessalians exists also, as Pietro
dello Valle tells us, among the Persians.

[14] An ancient city of Zea, the walls of which were of marble. Its
remains (says Clarke) "extend from the shore, quite into a valley watered
by the streams of a fountain, whence Ioulis received its name."

[15] Zea was the birthplace of this poet, whose verses are by Catullus
called "tears."

[16] These "Songs of the Well," as they were called among the ancients,
still exist in Greece. _De Guys_ tells us that he has seen "the young
women in Prince's Island, assembled in the evening at a public well,
suddenly strike up a dance, while others sung in concert to them."

[17] "The inhabitants of Syra, both ancient and modern, may be considered
as the worshippers of water. The old fountain, at which the nymphs of the
island assembled in the earliest ages, exists in its original state; the
same rendezvous as it was formerly, whether of love and gallantry, or of
gossiping and tale-telling. It is near to the town, and the most limpid
water gushes continually from the solid rock. It is regarded by the
inhabitants with a degree of religious veneration; and they p reserve a
tradition, that the pilgrims of old time, in their way to Delos, resorted
hither for purification."_--Clarke_.

[18] "Violet-crowned Athens."--_Pindar_.

[19] The whole of this scene was suggested by Pliny's account of the
artist Pausias and his mistress Glycera, _Lib_. 35 c. 40.

[20] The traveller Shaw mentions a beautiful rill In Barbary, which is
received into a large basin called _Shrub wee krub_, "Drink and away"--
there being great danger of meeting with thieves and assassins in such
places.

[21] The Arabian shepherd has a peculiar ceremony in weaning the young
camel; when the proper time arrives, he turns the camel towards the rising
star, Canopus, and says, "Do you see Canopus? from this moment you taste
not another drop of milk."--_Richardson_.

[22] "Whoever returns from a pilgrimage to Mecca hangs this plant (the
mitre-shaped Aloe) over his street door, as a token of his having
performed this holy journey."--_Hasselquist_.

[23] This form of notice to the caravans to prepare for marching was
applied by Hafiz to the necessity of relinquishing the pleasures of this
world, and preparing for death:--"For me what room is there for pleasure
in the bower of Beauty, when every moment the bell makes proclamation,
'Bind on your burden'?"

[24] The watchmen, in the camp of the caravans, go their rounds, crying
one after another, "God is one," etc.

[25] "It was customary," says Irwin, "to light up fires on the mountains,
within view of Cosseir, to give notice of the approach of the caravans
that came from the Nile."

[26] the Hume.

[27] The name which the Greeks give to the Virgin Mary.








ALCIPHRON: A FRAGMENT.






LETTER I.

FROM ALCIPHRON AT ALEXANDRIA TO CLEON AT ATHENS.


Well may you wonder at my flight
  From those fair Gardens in whose bowers
Lingers whate'er of wise and bright,
Of Beauty's smile or Wisdom's light,
  Is left to grace this world of ours.
Well may my comrades as they roam
  On such sweet eyes as this inquire
Why I have left that happy home
  Where all is found that all desire,
  And Time hath wings that never tire:
Where bliss in all the countless shapes
  That Fancy's self to bliss hath given
Comes clustering round like roadside grapes
  That woo the traveller's lip at even;
Where Wisdom flings not joy away--
As Pallas in the stream they say
Once flung her flute--but smiling owns
That woman's lip can send forth tones
Worth all the music of those spheres
So many dream of but none hears;
Where Virtue's self puts on so well
  Her sister Pleasure's smile that, loath
From either nymph apart to dwell,
  We finish by embracing both.
Yes, such the place of bliss, I own
From all whose charms I just have flown;
And even while thus to thee I write,
  And by the Nile's dark flood recline,
Fondly, in thought I wing my flight
Back to those groves and gardens bright,
And often think by this sweet light
  How lovelily they all must shine;
Can see that graceful temple throw
  Down the green slope its lengthened shade,
While on the marble steps below
  There sits some fair Athenian maid,
Over some favorite volume bending;
  And by her side a youthful sage
Holds back the ringlets that descending
  Would else o'ershadow all the page.
But hence such thoughts!--nor let me grieve
O'er scenes of joy that I but leave,
As the bird quits awhile its nest
To come again with livelier zest.

And now to tell thee--what I fear
Thou'lt gravely smile at--_why_ I'm here
Tho' thro' my life's short, sunny dream,
  I've floated without pain or care
Like a light leaf down pleasure's stream,
  Caught in each sparkling eddy there;
Tho' never Mirth awaked a strain
That my heart echoed not again;
Yet have I felt, when even most gay,
  Sad thoughts--I knew not whence or why--
  Suddenly o'er my spirit fly,
Like clouds that ere we've time to say
  "How bright the sky is!" shade the sky.
Sometimes so vague, so undefined
Were these strange darkenings of my mind--
"While naught but joy around me beamed
  So causelessly they've come and flown,
That not of life or earth they seemed,
  But shadows from some world unknown.
More oft, however, 'twas the thought
  How soon that scene with all its play
  Of life and gladness must decay--
Those lips I prest, the hands I caught--
Myself--the crowd that mirth had brought
Around me--swept like weeds away!

This thought it was that came to shed
  O'er rapture's hour its worst alloys;
And close as shade with sunshine wed
  Its sadness with my happiest joys.
Oh, but for this disheartening voice
  Stealing amid our mirth to say
That all in which we most rejoice
  Ere night may be the earthworm's prey--
_But_ for this bitter--only this--
Full as the world is brimmed with bliss,
And capable as feels my soul
Of draining to its dregs the whole,
I should turn earth to heaven and be,
If bliss made Gods, a Deity?

Thou know'st that night--the very last
That 'mong my Garden friends I past--
When the School held its feast of mirth
To celebrate our founder's birth.
And all that He in dreams but saw
  When he set Pleasure on the throne
Of this bright world and wrote her law
  In human hearts was felt and known--
_Not_ in unreal dreams but true,
Substantial joy as pulse e'er knew--
By hearts and bosoms, that each felt
_Itself_ the realm where Pleasure dwelt.

That night when all our mirth was o'er,
  The minstrels silent, and the feet
Of the young maidens heard no more--
  So stilly was the time, so sweet,
And such a calm came o'er that scene,
Where life and revel late had been--
Lone as the quiet of some bay
From which the sea hath ebbed away--
That still I lingered, lost in thought,
  Gazing upon the stars of night,
Sad and intent as if I sought
  Some mournful secret in their light;
And asked them mid that silence why
Man, glorious man, alone must die
While they, less wonderful than he,
Shine on thro' all eternity.

That night--thou haply may'st forget
  Its loveliness--but 'twas a night
To make earth's meanest slave regret
  Leaving a world so soft and bright.
On one side in the dark blue sky
Lonely and radiant was the eye
Of Jove himself, while on the other,
 'Mong stars that came out one by one,
The young moon--like the Roman mother
  Among her living jewels--shone.
"Oh that from yonder orbs," I thought,
  "Pure and eternal as they are,
"There could to earth some power be brought,
"Some charm with their own essence fraught
  "To make man deathless as a star,
"And open to his vast desires
  "A course, as boundless and sublime
"As that which waits those comet-fires,
  "That burn and roam throughout all time!"

While thoughts like these absorbed my mind,
  That weariness which earthly bliss
However sweet still leaves behind,
  As if to show how earthly 'tis,
Came lulling o'er me and I laid
  My limbs at that fair statue's base--
That miracle, which Art hath made
  Of all the choice of Nature's grace--
To which so oft I've knelt and sworn.
  That could a living maid like her
Unto this wondering world be born,
  I would myself turn worshipper.

Sleep came then o'er me--and I seemed
  To be transported far away
To a bleak desert plain where gleamed
  One single, melancholy ray.
Throughout that darkness dimly shed
  From a small taper in the hand
Of one who pale as are the dead
  Before me took his spectral stand,
And said while awfully a smile
  Came o'er the wanness of his cheek--
"Go and beside the sacred Nile
  "You'll find the Eternal Life you seek."

Soon as he spoke these words the hue
Of death o'er all his features grew
Like the pale morning when o'er night
She gains the victory full of light;
While the small torch he held became
A glory in his hand whose flame
Brightened the desert suddenly,
  Even to the far horizon's line--
Along whose level I could see
  Gardens and groves that seemed to shine
As if then o'er them freshly played
A vernal rainbow's rich cascade;
And music floated every where,
Circling, as 'twere itself the air,
And spirits on whose wings the hue
Of heaven still lingered round me flew,
Till from all sides such splendors broke,
That with the excess of light I woke!

Such was my dream;--and I confess
  Tho' none of all our creedless school
E'er conned, believed, or reverenced less
  The fables of the priest-led fool
Who tells us of a soul, a mind,
Separate and pure within us shrined,
Which is to live--ah, hope too bright!--
For ever in yon fields of light;
Who fondly thinks the guardian eyes
  Of Gods are on him--as if blest
And blooming in their own blue skies
The eternal Gods were not too wise
  To let weak man disturb their rest!--
Tho' thinking of such creeds as thou
  And all our Garden sages think,
Yet is there something, I allow,
  In dreams like this--a sort of link
With worlds unseen which from the hour
  I first could lisp my thoughts till now
Hath mastered me with spell-like power.

And who can tell, as we're combined
Of various atoms--some refined,
Like those that scintillate and play
In the fixt stars--some gross as they
That frown in clouds or sleep in clay--
Who can be sure but 'tis the best
  And brightest atoms of our frame,
  Those most akin to stellar flame,
That shine out thus, when we're at rest;--
Even as the stars themselves whose light
Comes out but in the silent night.
Or is it that there lurks indeed
Some truth in Man's prevailing creed
And that our Guardians from on high
  Come in that pause from toil and sin
To put the senses' curtain by
  And on the wakeful soul look in!

Vain thought!--but yet, howe'er it be,
Dreams more than once have proved to me
Oracles, truer far than Oak
Or Dove or Tripod ever spoke.
And 'twas the words--thou'lt hear and smile--
  The words that phantom seemed to speak--
"Go and beside the sacred Nile
  "You'll find the Eternal Life you seek"--
That haunting me by night, by day,
  At length as with the unseen hand
Of Fate itself urged me away
  From Athens to this Holy Land;
Where 'mong the secrets still untaught,
  The mysteries that as yet nor sun
Nor eye hath reached--oh, blessed thought!--
  May sleep this everlasting one.

Farewell--when to our Garden friends
Thou talk'st of the wild dream that sends
The gayest of their school thus far,
Wandering beneath Canopus' star,
Tell them that wander where he will
  Or howsoe'er they now condemn
His vague and vain pursuit he still
  Is worthy of the School and them;--
Still all their own--nor e'er forgets
  Even while his heart and soul pursue
The Eternal Light which never sets,
  The many meteor joys that _do_,
But seeks them, hails them with delight
Where'er they meet his longing sight.
And if his life _must_ wane away
Like other lives at least the day,
The hour it lasts shall like a fire
With incense fed in sweets expire.






LETTER II.

FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.

_Memphis_.


'Tis true, alas--the mysteries and the lore
I came to study on this, wondrous shore.
Are all forgotten in the new delights.
The strange, wild joys that fill my days and nights.
Instead of dark, dull oracles that speak
From subterranean temples, those _I_ seek
Come from the breathing shrines where Beauty lives,
And Love, her priest, the soft responses gives.
Instead of honoring Isis in those rites
At Coptos held, I hail her when she lights
Her first young crescent on the holy stream--
When wandering youths and maidens watch her beam
And number o'er the nights she hath to run,
Ere she again embrace her bridegroom sun.
While o'er some mystic leaf that dimly lends
A clew into past times the student bends,
And by its glimmering guidance learns to tread
Back thro' the shadowy knowledge of the dead--
The only skill, alas, _I_ yet can claim
Lies in deciphering some new loved-one's name--
Some gentle missive hinting time and place,
In language soft as Memphian reed can trace.

And where--oh where's the heart that could withstand
The unnumbered witcheries of this sun-born land,
Where first young Pleasure's banner was unfurled
And Love hath temples ancient as the world!
Where mystery like the veil by Beauty worn
Hides but to win and shades but to adorn;
Where that luxurious melancholy born
Of passion and of genius sheds a gloom
Making joy holy;--where the bower and tomb
Stand side by side and Pleasure learns from Death
The instant value of each moment's breath.
Couldst thou but see how like a poet's dream
This lovely land now looks!--the glorious stream
That late between its banks was seen to glide
'Mong shrines and marble cities on each side
Glittering like jewels strung along a chain
Hath now sent forth its waters, and o'er plain
And valley like a giant from his bed
Rising with outstretched limbs hath grandly spread.
While far as sight can reach beneath as clear
And blue a heaven as ever blest our sphere,
Gardens and pillared streets and porphyry domes
And high-built temples fit to be the homes
Of mighty Gods, and pyramids whose hour
Outlasts all time above the waters tower!

Then, too, the scenes of pomp and joy that make
One theatre of this vast, peopled lake,
Where all that Love, Religion, Commerce gives
Of life and motion ever moves and lives.
Here, up the steps of temples from the wave
Ascending in procession slow and grave.
Priests in white garments go, with sacred wands
And silver cymbals gleaming in their hands;
While there, rich barks--fresh from those sunny tracts
Far off beyond the sounding cataracts--
Glide with their precious lading to the sea,
Plumes of bright birds, rhinoceros ivory,
Gems from the Isle of Meroe, and those grains
Of gold washed down by Abyssinian rains.
Here where the waters wind into a bay
Shadowy and cool some pilgrims on their way
To Sas or Bubastus among beds
Of lotus flowers that close above their heads
Push their light barks, and there as in a bower,
Sing, talk, or sleep away the sultry hour;
Oft dipping in the Nile, when faint with heat,
That leaf from which its waters drink most sweet.--
While haply not far off beneath a bank
Of blossoming acacias many a prank
Is played in the cool current by a train
Of laughing nymphs, lovely as she,[1] whose chain
Around two conquerors of the world was cast,
But, for a third too feeble, broke at last.

For oh! believe not them who dare to brand
As poor in charms the women of this land.
Tho' darkened by that sun whose spirit flows
Thro' every vein and tinges as it goes,
'Tis but the embrowning of the fruit that tells
How rich within the soul of ripeness dwells--
The hue their own dark sanctuaries wear,
Announcing heaven in half-caught glimpses there.
And never yet did tell-tale looks set free
The secret of young hearts more tenderly.
Such eyes!--long, shadowy, with that languid fall
Of the fringed lids which may be seen in all
Who live beneath the sun's too ardent rays--
Lending such looks as on their marriage days
Young maids cast down before a bridegroom's gaze!
Then for their grace--mark but the nymph-like shapes
Of the young village girls, when carrying grapes
From green Anthylla or light urns of flowers--
Not our own Sculpture in her happiest hours
E'er imaged forth even at the touch of him[2]
Whose touch was life, more luxury of limb!
Then, canst thou wonder if mid scenes like these
I should forget all graver mysteries,
All lore but Love's, all secrets but that best
In heaven or earth, the art of being blest!
Yet are there times--tho' brief I own their stay,
Like summer-clouds that shine themselves away--
Moments of gloom, when even these pleasures pall
Upon my saddening heart and I recall
That garden dream--that promise of a power,
Oh, were there such!--to lengthen out life's hour,
On, on, as thro' a vista far away
Opening before us into endless day!
And chiefly o'er my spirit did this thought
Come on that evening--bright as ever brought
Light's golden farewell to the world--when first
The eternal pyramids of Memphis burst
Awfully on my sight-standing sublime
Twixt earth and heaven, the watch-towers of Time,
From whose lone summit when his reign hath past
From earth for ever he will look his last!

There hung a calm and solemn sunshine round
Those mighty monuments, a hushing sound
In the still air that circled them which stole
Like music of past times into my soul.
I thought what myriads of the wise and brave
And beautiful had sunk into the grave,
Since earth first saw these wonders--and I said
"Are things eternal only for the Dead?
"Hath Man no loftier hope than this which dooms
"His only lasting trophies to be tombs?
"But _'tis_ not so--earth, heaven, all nature shows
"He _may_ become immortal--_may_ unclose
"The wings within him wrapt, and proudly rise
"Redeemed from earth, a creature of the skies!

"And who can say, among the written spells
"From Hermes' hand that in these shrines and cells
"Have from the Flood lay hid there may not be
"Some secret clew to immortality,
"Some amulet whose spell can keep life's fire
"Awake within us never to expire!
"'Tis known that on the Emerald Table, hid
"For ages in yon loftiest pyramid,
"The Thrice-Great[3] did himself engrave of old
"The chymic mystery that gives endless gold.
"And why may not this mightier secret dwell
"Within the same dark chambers? who can tell
"But that those kings who by the written skill
"Of the Emerald Table called forth gold at will
"And quarries upon quarries heapt and hurled,
"To build them domes that might outstand the world--
"Who knows, but that the heavenlier art which shares
"The life of Gods with man was also theirs--
"That they themselves, triumphant o'er the power
"Of fate and death, are living at this hour;
"And these, the giant homes they still possess.
"Not tombs but everlasting palaces
"Within whose depths hid from the world above
"Even now they wander with the few they love,
"Thro' subterranean gardens, by a light
"Unknown on earth which hath nor dawn nor night!
"Else, why those deathless structures? why the grand
"And hidden halls that undermine this land?
"Why else hath none of earth e'er dared to go
"Thro' the dark windings of that realm below,
"Nor aught from heaven itself except the God
"Of Silence thro' those endless labyrinths trod?"
Thus did I dream--wild, wandering dreams, I own,
But such as haunt me ever, if alone,
Or in that pause 'twixt joy and joy I be,
Like a ship husht between two waves at sea.
Then do these spirit whisperings like the sound
Of the Dark Future come appalling round;
Nor can I break the trance that holds me then,
Till high o'er Pleasure's surge I mount again!

Even now for new adventure, new delight,
My heart is on the wing;--this very night,
The Temple on that island halfway o'er
From Memphis' gardens to the eastern shore
Sends up its annual rite[4] to her whose beams
Bring the sweet time of night-flowers and dreams;
The nymph who dips her urn in silent lakes
And turns to silvery dew each drop it takes;--
Oh! not our Dian of the North who chains
In vestal ice the current of young veins,
But she who haunts the gay Bubastian[5] grove
And owns she sees from her bright heaven above,
Nothing on earth to match that heaven but Love.
Think then what bliss will be abroad to-night!--
Besides those sparkling nymphs who meet the sight
Day after day, familiar as the sun,
Coy buds of beauty yet unbreathed upon
And all the hidden loveliness that lies,--
Shut up as are the beams of sleeping eyes
Within these twilight shrines--tonight shall be
Let loose like birds for this festivity!
And mark, 'tis nigh; already the sun bids
His evening farewell to the Pyramids.
As he hath done age after age till they
Alone on earth seem ancient as his ray;
While their great shadows stretching from the light
Look like the first colossal steps of Night
Stretching across the valley to invade
The distant hills of porphyry with their shade.
Around, as signals of the setting beam,
Gay, gilded flags on every housetop gleam:
While, hark!--from all the temples a rich swell
Of music to the Moon--farewell--farewell.


[1] Cleopatra.

[2] Apellas.

[3] The Hermes Trismegistus.

[4] The great Festival of the Moon.

[5] Bubastis, or Isis, was the Diana of the Egyptian mythology.






LETTER III.

FROM THE SAME TO THE SAME.

_Memphis_.


There is some star--or may it be
  That moon we saw so near last night--
Which comes athwart my destiny
  For ever with misleading light.
If for a moment pure and wise
  And calm I feel there quick doth fall
A spark from some disturbing eyes,
That thro' my heart, soul, being flies,
  And makes a wildfire of it all.
I've seen--oh, Cleon, that this earth
Should e'er have given such beauty birth!--
That man--but, hold--hear all that past
Since yester-night from first to last.

The rising of the Moon, calm, slow,
  And beautiful, as if she came
Fresh from the Elysian bowers below,
  Was with a loud and sweet acclaim
Welcomed from every breezy height,
Where crowds stood waiting for her light.
And well might they who viewed the scene
  Then lit up all around them, say
That never yet had Nature been
  Caught sleeping in a lovelier ray
Or rivalled her own noontide face
With purer show of moonlight grace.

Memphis--still grand, tho' not the same
  Unrivalled Memphis that could seize
From ancient Thebes the crown of Fame,
  And wear it bright thro' centuries--
Now, in the moonshine, that came down
Like a last smile upon that crown.
Memphis, still grand among her lakes,
  Her pyramids and shrines of fire,
Rose like a vision that half breaks
On one who dreaming still awakes
  To music from some midnight choir:
While to the west--where gradual sinks
  In the red sands from Libya rolled.
Some mighty column or fair sphynx,
  That stood in kingly courts of old--
It seemed as, mid the pomps that shone
Thus gayly round him Time looked on,
Waiting till all now bright and blest,
Should sink beneath him like the rest.

No sooner had the setting sun
Proclaimed the festal rite begun,
And mid their idol's fullest beams
  The Egyptian world was all afloat,
Than I who live upon these streams
Like a young Nile-bird turned my boat
To the fair island on whose shores
Thro' leafy palms and sycamores
Already shone the moving lights
Of pilgrims hastening to the rites.
While, far around like ruby sparks
Upon the water, lighted barks,
Of every form and kind--from those
  That down Syene's cataract shoots,
To the grand, gilded barge that rows
  To tambour's beat and breath of flutes,
And wears at night in words of flame
On the rich prow its master's name;--
All were alive and made this sea
  Of cities busy as a hill
Of summer ants caught suddenly
  In the overflowing of a rill.

Landed upon the isle, I soon
  Thro' marble alleys and small groves
  Of that mysterious palm she loves,
Reached the fair Temple of the Moon;
And there--as slowly thro' the last
Dim-lighted vestibule I past--
Between the porphyry pillars twined
  With palm and ivy, I could see
A band of youthful maidens wind
  In measured walk half dancingly,
Round a small shrine on which was placed
  That bird[1] whose plumes of black and white
Wear in their hue by Nature traced
  A type of the moon's shadowed light.

In drapery like woven snow
These nymphs were clad; and each below
The rounded bosom loosely wore
  A dark blue zone or bandelet,
With little silver stars all o'er
  As are the skies at midnight set.
While in their tresses, braided thro',
  Sparkled that flower of Egypt's lakes,
The silvery lotus in whose hue
  As much delight the young Moon takes
As doth the Day-God to behold
The lofty bean-flower's buds of gold.
And, as they gracefully went round
  The worshipt bird, some to the beat
Of castanets, some to the sound
  Of the shrill sistrum timed their feet;
While others at each step they took
A tinkling chain of silver shook.

They seemed all fair--but there was one
On whom the light had not yet shone,
Or shone but partly--so downcast
She held her brow, as slow she past.
And yet to me there seemed to dwell
  A charm about that unseen face--
A something in the shade that fell
  Over that brow's imagined grace
Which won me more than all the best
Outshining beauties of the rest.
And _her_ alone my eyes could see
Enchained by this sweet mystery;
And her alone I watched as round
She glided o'er that marble ground,
Stirring not more the unconscious air
Than if a Spirit were moving there.
Till suddenly, wide open flew
The Temple's folding gates and threw
A splendor from within, a flood
Of glory where these maidens stood.
While with that light--as if the same
Rich source gave birth to both--there came
A swell of harmony as grand
As e'er was born of voice and band,
Filling the gorgeous aisles around
With luxury of light and sound.

Then was it, by the flash that blazed
  Full o'er her features--oh 'twas then,
As startingly her eyes she raised,
  But quick let fall their lids again,
I saw--not Psyche's self when first
  Upon the threshold of the skies
She paused, while heaven's glory burst
  Newly upon her downcast eyes,
Could look more beautiful or blush
  With holier shame than did this maid,
Whom now I saw in all that gush
  Of splendor from the aisles, displayed.
Never--tho' well thou know'st how much
  I've felt the sway of Beauty's star--
Never did her bright influence touch
  My soul into its depths so far;
And had that vision lingered there
  One minute more I should have flown,
Forgetful _who_ I was and where.
  And at her feet in worship thrown
  Proffered my soul thro' life her own.

But scarcely had that burst of light
And music broke on ear and sight,
Than up the aisle the bird took wing
  As if on heavenly mission sent,
While after him with graceful spring
  Like some unearthly creatures, meant
  To live in that mixt element
  Of light and song the young maids went;
And she who in my heart had thrown
A spark to burn for life was flown.

In vain I tried to follow;--bands
  Of reverend chanters filled the aisle:
Where'er I sought to pass, their wands
  Motioned me back, while many a file
Of sacred nymphs--but ah, not they
Whom my eyes looked for thronged the way.
Perplext, impatient, mid this crowd
Of faces, lights--the o'erwhelming cloud
Of incense round me, and my blood
Full of its new-born fire--I stood,
Nor moved, nor breathed, but when I caught
  A glimpse of some blue, spangled zone,
Or wreath of lotus, which I thought
  Like those she wore at distance shone.

But no, 'twas vain--hour after hour,
  Till my heart's throbbing turned to pain,
And my strained eyesight lost its power,
  I sought her thus, but all in vain.
At length, hot--wildered--in despair,
I rushed into the cool night-air,
And hurrying (tho' with many a look
Back to the busy Temple) took
My way along the moonlight shore,
And sprung into my boat once more.
There is a Lake that to the north
Of Memphis stretches grandly forth,
Upon whose silent shore the Dead
  Have a proud city of their own,[2]
With shrines and pyramids o'erspread--
Where many an ancient kingly head
  Slumbers, immortalized in stone;
And where thro' marble grots beneath
  The lifeless, ranged like sacred things,
Nor wanting aught of life but breath,
  Lie in their painted coverings,
And on each new successive race
  That visit their dim haunts below
Look with the same unwithering face
  They wore three thousand years ago.

There. Silence, thoughtful God, who loves
The neighborhood of death in groves
Of asphodel lies hid and weaves
His hushing spell among the leaves--
Nor ever noise disturbs the air
  Save the low, humming, mournful sound
Of priests within their shrines at prayer
  For the fresh Dead entombed around.

'Twas toward this place of death--in mood
  Made up of thoughts, half bright, half dark--
I now across the shining flood
  Unconscious turned my light-winged bark.
The form of that young maid in all
  Its beauty was before me still;
And oft I thought, if thus to call
  Her image to my mind at will,
If but the memory of that one
Bright look of hers for ever gone,
Was to my heart worth all the rest
Of woman-kind, beheld, possest--
What would it be if wholly mine,
Within these arms as in a shrine,
Hallowed by Love, I saw her shine--
An idol, worshipt by the light
Of her own beauties, day and night--
If 'twas a blessing but to see
And lose again, what would _this_ be?

In thoughts like these--but often crost
By darker threads--my mind was lost,
Till near that City of the Dead,
Waked from my trance, I saw o'erhead--
As if by some enchanter bid
  Suddenly from the wave to rise--
Pyramid over pyramid
  Tower in succession to the skies;
While one, aspiring, as if soon,
  'Twould touch the heavens, rose over all;
And, on its summit, the white moon
  Rested as on a pedestal!

The silence of the lonely tombs
  And temples round where naught was heard
But the high palm-tree's tufted plumes,
  Shaken at times by breeze or bird,
Formed a deep contrast to the scene
Of revel where I late had been;
To those gay sounds that still came o'er,
Faintly from many a distant shore,
And the unnumbered lights that shone
Far o'er the flood from Memphis on
To the Moon's Isle and Babylon.

My oars were lifted and my boat
  Lay rocked upon the rippling stream;
While my vague thoughts alike afloat,
  Drifted thro' many an idle dream.
With all of which, wild and unfixt
As was their aim, that vision mixt,
That bright nymph of the Temple--now,
With the same innocence of brow
She wore within the lighted fane--
Now kindling thro' each pulse and vein
With passion of such deep-felt fire
As Gods might glory to inspire;--
And now--oh Darkness of the tomb,
  That must eclipse even light like hers!
Cold, dead, and blackening mid the gloom
  Of those eternal sepulchres.

Scarce had I turned my eyes away
  From that dark death-place, at the thought,
When by the sound of dashing spray
  From a light oar my ear was caught,
While past me, thro' the moonlight, sailed.
  A little gilded bark that bore
Two female figures closely veiled
  And mantled towards that funeral shore.
They landed--and the boat again
Put off across the watery plain.

Shall I confess--to _thee_ I may--
  That never yet hath come the chance
Of a new music, a new ray
  From woman's voice, from woman's glance,
Which--let it find me how it might,
  In joy or grief--I did not bless,
And wander after as a light
  Leading to undreamt, happiness.
And chiefly now when hopes so vain
Were stirring in my heart and brain,
When Fancy had allured my soul
  Into a chase as vague and far
As would be his who fixt his goal
  In the horizon or some star--
_Any_ bewilderment that brought
More near to earth my high-flown thought--
The faintest glimpse of joy, less pure,
Less high and heavenly, but more sure,
Came welcome--and was then to me
What the first flowery isle must be
To vagrant birds blown out to sea.

Quick to the shore I urged my bark,
  And by the bursts of moonlight shed
Between the lofty tombs could mark
  Those figures as with hasty tread
They glided on--till in the shade
  Of a small pyramid, which thro'
Some boughs of palm its peak displayed,
  They vanisht instant from my view.

I hurried to the spot--no trace
Of life was in that lonely place;
And had the creed I hold by taught
Of other worlds I might have thought
Some mocking spirits had from thence
Come in this guise to cheat my sense.

At length, exploring darkly round
The Pyramid's smooth sides, I found
An iron portal--opening high
  'Twixt peak and base--and, with a prayer
To the bliss-loving Moon whose eye
  Alone beheld me sprung in there.
Downward the narrow stairway led
Thro' many a duct obscure and dread,
  A labyrinth for mystery made,
With wanderings onward, backward, round,
And gathering still, where'er it wound.
  But deeper density of shade.

Scarce had I asked myself, "Can aught
  "That man delights in sojourn here?"--
When, suddenly, far off, I caught
  A glimpse of light, remote, but clear--
Whose welcome glimmer seemed to pour
  From some alcove or cell that ended
The long, steep, marble corridor,
  Thro' which I now, all hope, descended.
Never did Spartan to his bride
With warier foot at midnight glide.
It seemed as echo's self were dead
In this dark place, so mute my tread.
Reaching at length that light, I saw--
  Oh! listen to the scene now raised
Before my eyes--then guess the awe,
  The still, rapt awe with which I gazed.

'Twas a small chapel, lined around
With the fair, spangling marble found
In many a ruined shrine that stands
Half seen above the Libyan sands.
The walls were richly sculptured o'er,
And charactered with that dark lore
Of times before the Flood, whose key
Was lost in the "Universal Sea."--
While on the roof was pictured bright
  The Theban beetle as he shines,
  When the Nile's mighty flow declines
And forth the creature springs to light,
With life regenerate in his wings:--
Emblem of vain imaginings!
Of a new world, when this is gone,
In which the spirit still lives on!

Direct beneath this type, reclined
  On a black granite altar, lay
A female form, in crystal shrined,
  And looking fresh as if the ray
  Of soul had fled but yesterday,
While in relief of silvery hue
  Graved on the altar's front were seen
A branch of lotus, broken in two,
  As that fair creature's life had been,
And a small bird that from its spray
Was winging like her soul away.

But brief the glimpse I now could spare
  To the wild, mystic wonders round;
For there was yet one wonder there
  That held me as by witchery bound.
The lamp that thro' the chamber shed
Its vivid beam was at the head
Of her who on that altar slept;
  And near it stood when first I came--
Bending her brow, as if she kept
  Sad watch upon its silent flame--
A female form as yet so placed
  Between the lamp's strong glow and me,
That I but saw, in outline traced,
  The shadow of her symmetry.
Yet did my heart--I scarce knew why--
Even at that shadowed shape beat high.
Nor was it long ere full in sight
The figure turned; and by the light
That touched her features as she bent
Over the crystal monument,
I saw 'twas she--the same--the same--
  That lately stood before me, brightening
The holy spot where she but came
  And went again like summer lightning!

Upon the crystal o'er the breast
Of her who took that silent rest,
There was a cross of silver lying--
  Another type of that blest home,
Which hope and pride and fear of dying
  Build for us in a world to come:--
This silver cross the maiden raised
To her pure lips:--then, having gazed
Some minutes on that tranquil face,
Sleeping in all death's mournful grace,
Upward she turned her brow serene,
  As if intent on heaven those eyes
Saw them nor roof nor cloud between
  Their own pure orbits and the skies,
And, tho' her lips no motion made,
  And that fixt look was all her speech,
I saw that the rapt spirit prayed
  Deeper within than words could reach.

Strange power of Innocence, to turn
  To its own hue whate'er comes near,
And make even vagrant Passion burn
  With purer warmth within its sphere!
She who but one short hour before
Had come like sudden wild-fire o'er
My heart and brain--whom gladly even
  From that bright Temple in the face
Of those proud ministers of heaven,
  I would have borne in wild embrace,
And risked all punishment, divine
And human, but to make her mine;--
She, she was now before me, thrown
  By fate itself into my arms--
There standing, beautiful, alone,
  With naught to guard her but her charms.
Yet did I, then--did even a breath
  From my parched lips, too parched to move,
Disturb a scene where thus, beneath
  Earth's silent covering, Youth and Death
  Held converse thro' undying love?
No--smile and taunt me as thou wilt--
  Tho' but to gaze thus was delight,
Yet seemed it like a wrong, a guilt,
  To win by stealth so pure a sight:
And rather than a look profane
  Should then have met those thoughtful eyes,
Or voice or whisper broke the chain
That linked her spirit with the skies,
I would have gladly in that place
From which I watched her heavenward face,
Let my heart break, without one beat
That could disturb a prayer so sweet.
Gently, as if on every tread.
  My life, my more than life depended,
Back thro' the corridor that led
  To this blest scene I now ascended,
And with slow seeking and some pain
And many a winding tried in vain
Emerged to upper earth again.

The sun had freshly risen, and down
  The marble hills of Araby,
Scattered as from a conqueror's crown
  His beams into that living sea.
There seemed a glory in his light,
  Newly put on--as if for pride.
Of the high homage paid this night
  To his own Isis, his young bride.,
Now fading feminine away
In her proud Lord's superior ray.

My mind's first impulse was to fly
  At once from this entangling net--
New scenes to range, new loves to try,
Or in mirth, wine and luxury
Of every sense that might forget.
But vain the effort--spell-bound still,
I lingered, without power or will
  To turn my eyes from that dark door,
Which now enclosed her 'mong the dead;
 Oft fancying, thro' the boughs that o'er
The sunny pile their flickering shed.
'Twas her light form again I saw
  Starting to earth--still pure and bright,
But wakening, as I hoped, less awe,
  Thus seen by morning's natural light,
  Than in that strange, dim cell at night.

But no, alas--she ne'er returned:
  Nor yet--tho' still I watch--nor yet,
Tho' the red sun for hours hath burned,
  And now in his mid course hath met
The peak of that eternal pile
  He pauses still at noon to bless,
Standing beneath his downward smile,
  Like a great Spirit shadowless!--
Nor yet she comes--while here, alone,
  Sauntering thro' this death-peopled place,
Where no heart beats except my own,
Or 'neath a palm-tree's shelter thrown,
  By turns I watch and rest and trace
These lines that are to waft to thee
My last night's wondrous history.

Dost thou remember, in that Isle
  Of our own Sea where thou and I
Lingered so long, so happy a while,
  Till all the summer flowers went by--
How gay it was when sunset brought
  To the cool Well our favorite maids--
Some we had won, and some we sought--
  To dance within the fragrant shades,
And till the stars went down attune
Their Fountain Hymns[3] to the young moon?

That time, too--oh, 'tis like a dream--
  When from Scamander's holy tide
I sprung as Genius of the Stream,
  And bore away that blooming bride,
Who thither came, to yield her charms
  (As Phrygian maids are wont ere wed)
Into the cold Scamander's arms,
  But met and welcomed mine, instead--
Wondering as on my neck she fell,
How river-gods could love so well!
Who would have thought that he who roved
  Like the first bees of summer then,
Rifling each sweet nor ever loved
  But the free hearts that loved again,
Readily as the reed replies
To the least breath that round it sighs--
Is the same dreamer who last night
Stood awed and breathless at the sight
Of one Egyptian girl; and now
Wanders among these tombs with brow
Pale, watchful, sad, as tho' he just,
Himself, had risen from out their dust!

Yet so it is--and the same thirst
  For something high and pure, above
This withering world, which from the first
  Made me drink deep of woman's love--
As the one joy, to heaven most near
Of all our hearts can meet with here--
Still burns me up, still keeps awake
A fever naught but death can slake.

Farewell; whatever may befall--
Or bright, or dark--thou'lt know it all.


[1] The Ibis.

[2] Necropolis, or the City of the Dead, to the south of Memphis.

[3] These Songs of the Well, as they were called by the ancients, are
still common in the Greek isles.






LETTER IV.

FROM ORCUS, HIGH PRIEST OF MEMPHIS, TO
DECIUS, THE PRAETORIAN PREFECT.


Rejoice, my friend, rejoice;--the youthful Chief
Of that light Sect which mocks at all belief,
And gay and godless makes the present hour
Its only heaven, is now within our power.
Smooth, impious school!--not all the weapons aimed,
At priestly creeds, since first a creed was framed,
E'er struck so deep as that sly dart they wield,
The Bacchant's pointed spear in laughing flowers concealed.
And oh, 'twere victory to this heart, as sweet
As any _thou _canst boast--even when the feet
Of thy proud war-steed wade thro' Christian blood,
To wrap this scoffer in Faith's blinding hood,
And bring him tamed and prostrate to implore
The vilest gods even Egypt's saints adore.
What!--do these sages think, to _them_ alone
The key of this world's happiness is known?
That none but they who make such proud parade
Of Pleasure's smiling favors win the maid,
Or that Religion keeps no secret place,
No niche in her dark fanes for Love to grace?

Fools!--did they know how keen the zest that's given
To earthly joy when seasoned well with heaven;
How Piety's grave mask improves the hue
Of Pleasure's laughing features, half seen thro',
And how the Priest set aptly within reach
Of two rich worlds, traffics for bliss with each,
Would they not, Decius--thou, whom the ancient tie
'Twixt Sword and Altar makes our best ally--
Would they not change their creed, their craft, for ours?
Leave the gross daylight joys that in their bowers
Languish with too much sun, like o'er-blown flowers,
For the veiled loves, the blisses undisplayed
That slyly lurk within the Temple's shade?
And, 'stead of haunting the trim Garden's school--
Where cold Philosophy usurps a rule,
Like the pale moon's, o'er passion's heaving tide,
Till Pleasure's self is chilled by Wisdom's pride--
Be taught by _us_, quit shadows for the true,
Substantial joys we sager Priests pursue,
Who far too wise to theorize on bliss
Or pleasure's substance for its shade to miss.
Preach _other_ worlds but live for only _this_:-
Thanks to the well-paid Mystery round us flung,
Which, like its type the golden cloud that hung
O'er Jupiter's love-couch its shade benign,
Round human frailty wraps a veil divine.

Still less should they presume, weak wits, that they
Alone despise the craft of us who pray;--
Still less their creedless vanity deceive
With the fond thought that we who pray believe.
Believe!--Apis forbid--forbid it, all
Ye monster Gods before whose shrines we fall--
Deities framed in jest as if to try
How far gross Man can vulgarize the sky;
How far the same low fancy that combines
Into a drove of brutes yon zodiac's signs,
And turns that Heaven itself into a place
Of sainted sin and deified disgrace,
Can bring Olympus even to shame more deep,
Stock it with things that earth itself holds cheap.
Fish, flesh, and fowl, the kitchen's sacred brood,
Which Egypt keeps for worship, not for food--
All, worthy idols of a Faith that sees
In dogs, cats, owls, and apes, divinities!

Believe!--oh, Decius, thou, who feel'st no care
For things divine beyond the soldier's share,
Who takes on trust the faith for which he bleeds,
A good, fierce God to swear by, all he needs--
Little canst thou, whose creed around thee hangs
Loose as thy summer war-cloak guess the pangs
Of loathing and self-scorn with which a heart
Stubborn as mine is acts the zealot's part--
The deep and dire disgust with which I wade
Thro' the foul juggling of this holy trade--
This mud profound of mystery where the feet
At every step sink deeper in deceit.
Oh! many a time, when, mid the Temple's blaze,
O'er prostrate fools the sacred cist I raise,
Did I not keep still proudly in my mind
The power this priestcraft gives me o'er mankind--
A lever, of more might, in skilful hand,
To move this world, than Archimede e'er planned--
I should in vengeance of the shame I feel
At my own mockery crush the slaves that kneel
Besotted round; and--like that kindred breed
Of reverend, well-drest crocodiles they feed,
At famed Arsino[1]--make my keepers bless,
With their last throb, my sharp-fanged Holiness.

Say, _is_ it to be borne, that scoffers, vain
Of their own freedom from the altar's chain,
Should mock thus all that thou thy blood hast sold.
And I my truth, pride, freedom, to uphold?
It must not be:--think'st thou that Christian sect,
Whose followers quick as broken waves, erect
Their crests anew and swell into a tide,
That threats to sweep away our shrines of pride--
Think'st thou with all their wondrous spells even they
Would triumph thus, had not the constant play
Of Wit's resistless archery cleared their way?--
That mocking spirit, worst of all the foes,
Our solemn fraud, our mystic mummery knows,
Whose wounding flash thus ever 'mong the signs
Of a fast-falling creed, prelusive shines,
Threatening such change as do the awful freaks
Of summer lightning ere the tempest breaks.

But, to my point--a youth of this vain school,
But one, whom Doubt itself hath failed to cool
Down to that freezing point where Priests despair
Of any spark from the altar catching there--
Hath, some nights since--it was, me thinks, the night
That followed the full Moon's great annual rite--
Thro' the dark, winding ducts that downward stray
To these earth--hidden temples, tracked his way,
Just at that hour when, round the Shrine, and me,
The choir of blooming nymphs thou long'st to see,
Sing their last night-hymn in the Sanctuary.
The clangor of the marvellous Gate that stands
At the Well's lowest depth--which none but hands
Of new, untaught adventurers, from above,
Who know not the safe path, e'er dare to move--
Gave signal that a foot profane was nigh:--
'Twas the Greek youth, who, by that morning's sky,
Had been observed, curiously wandering round
The mighty fanes of our sepulchral ground.

Instant, the Initiate's Trials were prepared,--
The Fire, Air, Water; all that Orpheus dared,
That Plato, that the bright-haired Samian[2] past,
With trembling hope, to come to--_what_, at last?
Go, ask the dupes of Priestcraft; question him
Who mid terrific sounds and spectres dim
Walks at Eleusis; ask of those who brave
The dazzling miracles of Mithra's Cave
With its seven starry gates; ask all who keep
Those terrible night-mysteries where they weep
And howl sad dirges to the answering breeze.
O'er their dead Gods, their mortal Deities--
Amphibious, hybrid things that died as men,
Drowned, hanged, empaled, to rise as gods again;--
Ask _them_, what mighty secret lurks below
This seven-fold mystery--can they tell thee? No;
Gravely they keep that only secret, well
And fairly kept--that they have none to tell;
And duped themselves console their humbled pride
By duping thenceforth all mankind beside.

And such the advance in fraud since Orpheus' time--
That earliest master of our craft sublime--
So many minor Mysteries, imps of fraud,
From the great Orphic Egg have winged abroad,
That, still to uphold our Temple's ancient boast,
And seem most holy, we must cheat the most;
Work the best miracles, wrap nonsense round
In pomp and darkness till it seems profound;
Play on the hopes, the terrors of mankind,
With changeful skill; and make the human mind
Like our own Sanctuary, where no ray
But by the Priest's permission wins its way--
Where thro' the gloom as wave our wizard rods.
Monsters at will are conjured into Gods;
While Reason like a grave-faced mummy stands
With her arms swathed in hieroglyphic bands.
But chiefly in that skill with which we use
Man's wildest passions for Religion's views,
Yoking them to her car like fiery steeds,
Lies the main art in which our craft succeeds.
And oh be blest, ye men of yore, whose toil
Hath, for our use, scooped out from Egypt's soil
This hidden Paradise, this mine of fanes,
Gardens and palaces where Pleasure reigns
In a rich, sunless empire of her own,
With all earth's luxuries lighting up her throne:--
A realm for mystery made, which undermines
The Nile itself and, 'neath the Twelve Great Shrines
That keep Initiation's holy rite,
Spreads its long labyrinths of unearthly light.
A light that knows no change--its brooks that run
Too deep for day, its gardens without sun,
Where soul and sense, by turns, are charmed, surprised.
And all that bard or prophet e'er devised
For man's Elysium, priests have realized.

Here, at this moment--all his trials past.
And heart and nerve unshrinking to the last--
Our new Initiate roves--as yet left free
To wander thro' this realm of mystery;
Feeding on such illusions as prepare
The soul, like mist o'er waterfalls, to wear
All shapes and lines at Fancy's varying will,
Thro' every shifting aspect, vapor still;--
Vague glimpses of the Future, vistas shown.
By scenic skill, into that world unknown.
Which saints and sinners claim alike their own;
And all those other witching, wildering arts,
Illusions, terrors, that make human hearts,
Ay, even the wisest and the hardiest quail
To _any_ goblin throned behind a veil.
Yes--such the spells shall haunt his eye, his ear,
Mix wild his night-dreams, form his atmosphere;
Till, if our Sage be not tamed down, at length,
His wit, his wisdom, shorn of all their strength,
Like Phrygian priests, in honor of the shrine--
If he become not absolutely mine,
Body and soul and like the tame decoy
Which wary hunters of wild doves employ
Draw converts also, lure his brother wits
To the dark cage where his own spirit flits.
And give us if not saints good hypocrites--
If I effect not this then be it said
The ancient spirit of our craft hath fled,
Gone with that serpent-god the Cross hath chased
To hiss its soul out in the Theban waste.


[1] For the trinkets with which the sacred Crocodiles were ornamented see
the "Epicurean" chap x.

[2] Pythagoras.








LALLA ROOKH




TO

SAMUEL ROGERS, ESQ.

THIS EASTERN ROMANCE

IS INSCRIBED

BY

HIS VERY GRATEFUL AND AFFECTIONATE FRIEND,

THOMAS MOORE.






LALLA ROOKH


In the eleventh year of the reign of Aurungzebe, Abdalla, King of the
Lesser Bucharia, a lineal descendant from the Great Zingis, having
abdicated the throne in favor of his son, set out on a pilgrimage to the
Shrine of the Prophet; and, passing into India through the delightful
valley of Cashmere, rested for a short time at Delhi on his way. He was
entertained by Aurungzebe in a style of magnificent hospitality, worthy
alike of the visitor and the host, and was afterwards escorted with the
same splendor to Surat, where he embarked for Arabia.[1] During the stay
of the Royal Pilgrim at Delhi, a marriage was agreed upon between the
Prince, his son, and the youngest daughter of the Emperor, LALLA ROOKH;
[2]--a Princess described by the poets of her time as more beautiful than
Leila,[3] Shirine,[4] Dewild,[5] or any of those heroines whose names
and loves embellish the songs of Persia and Hindostan. It was intended
that the nuptials should be celebrated at Cashmere; where the young King,
as soon as the cares of the empire would permit, was to meet, for the
first time, his lovely bride, and, after a few months' repose in that
enchanting valley, conduct her over the snowy hills into Bucharia.

The day of LALLA ROOKH'S departure from Delhi was as splendid as sunshine
and pageantry could make it. The bazaars and baths were all covered with
the richest tapestry; hundreds of gilded barges upon the Jumna floated
with their banners shining in the water; while through the streets groups
of beautiful children went strewing the most delicious flowers around, as
in that Persian festival called the Scattering of the Roses;[6] till
every part of the city was as fragrant as if a caravan of musk from Khoten
had passed through it. The Princess, having taken leave of her kind
father, who at parting hung a cornelian of Yemen round her neck, on which
was inscribed a verse from the Koran, and having sent a considerable
present to the Fakirs, who kept up the Perpetual Lamp in her sister's
tomb, meekly ascended the palankeen prepared for her; and while Aurungzebe
stood to take a last look from his balcony, the procession moved slowly on
the road to Lahore.

Seldom had the Eastern world seen a cavalcade so superb. From the gardens
in the suburbs to the Imperial palace, it was one unbroken line of
splendor. The gallant appearance of the Rajahs and Mogul lords,
distinguished by those insignia of the Emperor's favor,[7] the feathers
of the egret of Cashmere in their turbans, and the small silver-rimm'd
kettle-drums at the bows of their saddles;--the costly armor of their
cavaliers, who vied, on this occasion, with the guards of the great Keder
Khan,[8] in the brightness of their silver battle-axes and the massiness
of their maces of gold;--the glittering of the gilt pine-apple[9] on the
tops of the palankeens;--the embroidered trappings of the elephants,
bearing on their backs small turrets, in the shape of little antique
temples, within which the Ladies of LALLA ROOKH lay as it were enshrined;
--the rose-colored veils of the Princess's own sumptuous litter,[10] at
the front of which a fair young female slave sat fanning her through the
curtains, with feathers of the Argus pheasant's wing;[11]--and the lovely
troop of Tartarian and Cashmerian maids of honor, whom the young King had
sent to accompany his bride, and who rode on each side of the litter, upon
small Arabian horses;--all was brilliant, tasteful, and magnificent, and
pleased even the critical and fastidious FADLADEEN, Great Nazir or
Chamberlain of the Haram, who was borne in his palankeen immediately after
the Princess, and considered himself not the least important personage of
the pageant.

FADLADEEN was a judge of everything,--from the pencilling of a
Circassian's eyelids to the deepest questions of science and literature;
from the mixture of a conserve of rose-leaves to the composition of an
epic poem: and such influence had his opinion upon the various tastes of
the day, that all the cooks and poets of Delhi stood in awe of him. His
political conduct and opinions were founded upon that line of Sadi,--
"Should the Prince at noon-day say, It is night, declare that you behold
the moon and stars."--And his zeal for religion, of which Aurungzebe was a
munificent protector,[12] was about as disinterested as that of the
goldsmith who fell in love with the diamond eyes of the idol of
Jaghernaut.[13]

During the first days of their journey, LALLA ROOKH, who had passed all
her life within the shadow of the Royal Gardens of Delhi,[14] found
enough in the beauty of the scenery through which they passed to interest
her mind, and delight her imagination; and when at evening or in the heat
of the day they turned off from the high road to those retired and
romantic places which had been selected for her encampments,--sometimes,
on the banks of a small rivulet, as clear as the waters of the Lake of
Pearl;[15] sometimes under the sacred shade of a Banyan tree, from which
the view opened upon a glade covered with antelopes; and often in those
hidden, embowered spots, described by one from the Isles of the West,
[16]as "places of melancholy, delight, and safety, where all the company
around was wild peacocks and turtle-doves;"--she felt a charm in these
scenes, so lovely and so new to her, which, for a time, made her
indifferent to every other amusement. But LALLA ROOKH was young, and the
young love variety; nor could the conversation of her Ladies and the Great
Chamberlain, FADLADEEN,(the only persons, of course, admitted to her
pavilion.) sufficiently enliven those many vacant hours, which were
devoted neither to the pillow nor the palankeen. There was a little
Persian slave who sung sweetly to the Vina, and who, now and then, lulled
the Princess to sleep with the ancient ditties of her country, about the
loves of Wavnak and Ezra,[17] the fair-haired Zal and his mistress
Rodahver,[18] not forgetting the combat of Rustam with the terrible White
Demon.[19] At other times she was amused by those graceful dancing-girls
of Delhi, who had been permitted by the Bramins of the Great Pagoda to
attend her, much to the horror of the good Mussulman FADLADEEN, who could
see nothing graceful or agreeable in idolaters, and to whom the very
tinkling of their golden anklets[20] was an abomination.

But these and many other diversions were repeated till they lost all their
charm, and the nights and noon-days were beginning to move heavily, when,
at length, it was recollected that, among the attendants sent by the
bridegroom, was a young poet of Cashmere, much celebrated throughout the
Valley for his manner of reciting the Stories of the East, on whom his
Royal Master had conferred the privilege of being admitted to the pavilion
of the Princess, that he might help to beguile the tediousness of the
journey by some of his most agreeable recitals. At the mention of a poet,
FADLADEEN elevated his critical eyebrows, and, having refreshed his
faculties with a dose of that delicious opium which is distilled from the
black poppy of the Thebais, gave orders for the minstrel to be forthwith
introduced into the presence.

The Princess, who had once in her life seen a poet from behind the screens
of gauze in her father's hall, and had conceived from that specimen no
very favorable ideas of the Caste, expected but little in this new
exhibition to interest her;--she felt inclined, however, to alter her
opinion on the very first appearance of FERAMORZ. He was a youth about
LALLA ROOKH'S own age, and graceful as that idol of women,
Crishna,[21]--such as he appears to their young imaginations, heroic,
beautiful, breathing music from his very eyes, and exalting the religion
of his worshippers into love. His dress was simple, yet not without some
marks of costliness; and the Ladies of the Princess were not long in
discovering that the cloth, which encircled his high Tartarian cap, was of
the most delicate kind that the shawl-goats of Tibet supply.[22] Here and
there, too, over his vest, which was confined by a flowered girdle of
Kashan, hung strings of fine pearl, disposed with an air of studied
negligence;--nor did the exquisite embroidery of his sandals escape the
observation of these fair critics; who, however they might give way to
FADLADEEN upon the unimportant topics of religion and government, had the
spirit of martyrs in everything relating to such momentous matters as
jewels and embroidery.

For the purpose of relieving the pauses of recitation by music, the young
Cashmerian held in his hand a kitar;--such as, in old times, the Arab
maids of the West used to listen to by moonlight in the gardens of the
Alhambra--and, having premised, with much humility, that the story he was
about to relate was founded on the adventures of that Veiled Prophet of
Khorassan,[23] who, in the year of the Hegira 163, created such alarm
throughout the Eastern Empire, made an obeisance to the Princess, and thus
began:--


THE VEILED PROPHET OF KHORASSAN.[24]


In that delightful Province of the Sun,
The first of Persian lands he shines upon.
Where all the loveliest children of his beam,
Flowerets and fruits, blush over every stream,[25]
And, fairest of all streams, the MURGA roves
Among MEROU'S[26] bright palaces and groves;--
There on that throne, to which the blind belief
Of millions raised him, sat the Prophet-Chief,
The Great MOKANNA. O'er his features hung
The Veil, the Silver Veil, which he had flung
In mercy there, to hide from mortal sight
His dazzling brow, till man could bear its light.
For, far less luminous, his votaries said,
Were even the gleams, miraculously shed
O'er MOUSSA'S[27] cheek, when down the Mount he trod
All glowing from the presence of his God!

  On either side, with ready hearts and hands,
His chosen guard of bold Believers stands;
Young fire-eyed disputants, who deem their swords,
On points of faith, more eloquent than words;

And such their zeal, there's not a youth with brand
Uplifted there, but at the Chief's command,
Would make his own devoted heart its sheath,
And bless the lips that doomed so dear a death!
In hatred to the Caliph's hue of night,[28]
Their vesture, helms and all, is snowy white;
Their weapons various--some equipt for speed,
With javelins of the light Kathaian reed;[29]
Or bows of buffalo horn and shining quivers
Filled with the stems[30]
that bloom on IRAN'S rivers;[31]
While some, for war's more terrible attacks,
Wield the huge mace and ponderous battle-axe;
And as they wave aloft in morning's beam
The milk-white plumage of their helms, they seem
Like a chenar-tree grove[32] when winter throws
O'er all its tufted heads his feathery snows.

  Between the porphyry pillars that uphold
The rich moresque-work of the roof of gold,
Aloft the Haram's curtained galleries rise,
Where thro' the silken net-work, glancing eyes,
From time to time, like sudden gleams that glow
Thro' autumn clouds, shine o'er the pomp below.--
What impious tongue, ye blushing saints, would dare
To hint that aught but Heaven hath placed you there?
Or that the loves of this light world could bind,
In their gross chain, your Prophet's soaring mind?
No--wrongful thought!--commissioned from above
To people Eden's bowers with shapes of love,
(Creatures so bright, that the same lips and eyes
They wear on earth will serve in Paradise,)
There to recline among Heaven's native maids,
And crown the Elect with bliss that never fades--
Well hath the Prophet-Chief his bidding done;
And every beauteous race beneath the sun,
From those who kneel at BRAHMA'S burning fount,[33]
To the fresh nymphs bounding o'er YEMEN'S mounts;
From PERSIA'S eyes of full and fawnlike ray,
To the small, half-shut glances of KATHAY;[34]
And GEORGIA'S bloom, and AZAB'S darker smiles,
And the gold ringlets of the Western Isles;
All, all are there;--each Land its flower hath given,
To form that fair young Nursery for Heaven!

  But why this pageant now? this armed array?
What triumph crowds the rich Divan to-day
With turbaned heads of every hue and race,
Bowing before that veiled and awful face,
Like tulip-beds,[35] of different shape and dyes,
Bending beneath the invisible West-wind's sighs!
What new-made mystery now for Faith to sign
And blood to seal, as genuine and divine,
What dazzling mimicry of God's own power
Hath the bold Prophet planned to grace this hour?

  Not such the pageant now, tho' not less proud;
Yon warrior youth advancing from the crowd
With silver bow, with belt of broidered crape
And fur-bound bonnet of Bucharian shape.[36]
So fiercely beautiful in form and eye,
Like war's wild planet in a summer sky;
That youth to-day,--a proselyte, worth hordes
Of cooler spirits and less practised swords,--
Is come to join, all bravery and belief,
The creed and standard of the heaven-sent Chief.

  Tho' few his years, the West already knows
Young AZIM'S fame;--beyond the Olympian snows
Ere manhood darkened o'er his downy cheek,
O'erwhelmed in fight and captive to the Greek,[37]
He lingered there, till peace dissolved his chains;--
Oh! who could even in bondage tread the plains
Of glorious GREECE nor feel his spirit rise
Kindling within him? who with heart and eyes
Could walk where Liberty had been nor see
The shining foot-prints of her Deity,
Nor feel those god-like breathings in the air
Which mutely told her spirit had been there?
Not he, that youthful warrior,--no, too well
For his soul's quiet worked the awakening spell;
And now, returning to his own dear land,
Full of those dreams of good that, vainly grand,
Haunt the young heart,--proud views of human-kind,
Of men to Gods exalted and refined,--
False views like that horizon's fair deceit
Where earth and heaven but _seem_, alas, to meet!--
Soon as he heard an Arm Divine was raised
To right the nations, and beheld, emblazed
On the white flag MOKANNA'S host unfurled,
Those words of sunshine, "Freedom to the World,"
At once his faith, his sword, his soul obeyed
The inspiring summons; every chosen blade
That fought beneath that banner's sacred text
Seemed doubly edged for this world and the next;
And ne'er did Faith with her smooth bandage bind
Eyes more devoutly willing to be blind,
In virtue's cause;--never was soul inspired
With livelier trust in what it most desired,
Than his, the enthusiast there, who kneeling, pale
With pious awe before that Silver Veil,
Believes the form to which he bends his knee
Some pure, redeeming angel sent to free
This fettered world from every bond and stain,
And bring its primal glories back again!

Low as young AZIM knelt, that motley crowd
Of all earth's nations sunk the knee and bowed,
With shouts of "ALLA!" echoing long and loud;
Which high in air, above the Prophet's head,
Hundreds of banners to the sunbeam spread
Waved, like the wings of the white birds that fan
The flying throne of star-taught SOLIMAN.[38]
Then thus he spoke:-"Stranger, tho' new the frame
"Thy soul inhabits now. I've trackt its flame
"For many an age,[39] in every chance and change
"Of that existence, thro' whose varied range,--
"As thro' a torch-race where from hand to hand
"The flying youths transmit their shining brand,
"From frame to frame the unextinguisht soul
"Rapidly passes till it reach the goal!

"Nor think 'tis only the gross Spirits warmed
"With duskier fire and for earth's medium formed
"That run this course;--Beings the most divine
"Thus deign thro' dark mortality to shine.
"Such was the Essence that in ADAM dwelt,
"To which all Heaven except the Proud One knelt:[40]
"Such the refined Intelligence that glowed
"In MOUSSA'S[41] frame,--and thence descending flowed
"Thro' many a Prophet's breast;--in ISSA[42] shone
"And in MOHAMMED burned; till hastening on.
"(As a bright river that from fall to fall
"In many a maze descending bright thro' all,
"Finds some fair region where, each labyrinth past,
"In one full lake of light it rests at last)
"That Holy Spirit settling calm and free
"From lapse or shadow centres all in me!

Again throughout the assembly at these words
Thousands of voices rung: the warrior's swords
Were pointed up at heaven; a sudden wind
In the open banners played, and from behind
Those Persian hangings that but ill could screen
The Harem's loveliness, white hands were seen
Waving embroidered scarves whose motion gave
A perfume forth--like those the Houris wave
When beckoning to their bowers the immortal Brave.

"But these," pursued the Chief "are truths sublime,
"That claim a holier mood and calmer time
"Than earth allows us now;--this sword must first
"The darkling prison-house of mankind burst.
"Ere Peace can visit them or Truth let in
"Her wakening daylight on a world of sin.
"But then,--celestial warriors, then when all
"Earth's shrines and thrones before our banner fall,
"When the glad Slave shall at these feet lay down
"His broken chain, the tyrant Lord his crown,
"The Priest his book, the Conqueror his wreath,
"And from the lips of Truth one mighty breath
"Shall like a whirlwind scatter in its breeze
"That whole dark pile of human mockeries:--
"Then shall the reign of mind commence on earth,
"And starting fresh as from a second birth,
"Man in the sunshine of the world's new spring
"Shall walk transparent like some holy thing!
"Then too your Prophet from his angel brow
"Shall cast the Veil that hides its splendors now,
"And gladdened Earth shall thro' her wide expanse
"Bask in the glories of this countenance!

"For thee, young warrior, welcome!--thou hast yet
"Some tasks to learn, some frailties to forget,
"Ere the white war-plume o'er thy brow can wave;--
"But, once my own, mine all till in the grave!"

The pomp is at an end--the crowds are gone--
Each ear and heart still haunted by the tone
Of that deep voice, which thrilled like ALLA'S own!
The Young all dazzled by the plumes and lances,
The glittering throne and Haram's half-caught glances,
The Old deep pondering on the promised reign
Of peace and truth, and all the female train
Ready to risk their eyes could they but gaze
A moment on that brow's miraculous blaze!

But there was one among the chosen maids
Who blushed behind the gallery's silken shades,
One, to whose soul the pageant of to-day
Has been like death:--you saw her pale dismay,
Ye wondering sisterhood, and heard the burst
Of exclamation from her lips when first
She saw that youth, too well, too dearly known,
Silently kneeling at the Prophet's throne.

Ah ZELICA! there was a time when bliss
Shone o'er thy heart from every look of his,
When but to see him, hear him, breathe the air
In which he dwelt was thy soul's fondest prayer;
When round him hung such a perpetual spell,
Whate'er he did, none ever did so well.
Too happy days! when, if he touched a flower
Or gem of thine, 'twas sacred from that hour;
When thou didst study him till every tone
And gesture and dear look became thy own.--
Thy voice like his, the changes of his face
In thine reflected with still lovelier grace,
Like echo, sending back sweet music, fraught
With twice the aerial sweetness it had brought!
Yet now he comes,--brighter than even he
E'er beamed before,--but, ah! not bright for thee;
No--dread, unlookt for, like a visitant
From the other world he comes as if to haunt
Thy guilty soul with dreams of lost delight,
Long lost to all but memory's aching sight:--
Sad dreams! as when the Spirit of our Youth
Returns in sleep, sparkling with all the truth
And innocence once ours and leads us back,
In mournful mockery o'er the shining track
Of our young life and points out every ray
Of hope and peace we've lost upon the way!

  Once happy pair!--In proud BOKHARA'S groves,
Who had not heard of their first youthful loves?
Born by that ancient flood,[43]which from its spring
In the dark Mountains swiftly wandering,
Enriched by every pilgrim brook that shines
With relics from BUCHARIA'S ruby mines.
And, lending to the CASPIAN half its strength,
In the cold Lake of Eagles sinks at length;--
There, on the banks of that bright river born,
The flowers that hung above its wave at morn
Blest not the waters as they murmured by
With holier scent and lustre than the sigh
And virgin-glance of first affection cast
Upon their youth's smooth current as it past!
But war disturbed this vision,--far away
From her fond eyes summoned to join the array
Of PERSIA'S warriors on the hills of THRACE,
The youth exchanged his sylvan dwelling-place
For the rude tent and war-field's deathful clash;
His ZELICA'S sweet glances for the flash
Of Grecian wild-fire, and Love's gentle chains
For bleeding bondage on BYZANTIUM'S plains.

  Month after month in widowhood of soul
Drooping the maiden saw two summers roll
Their suns away--but, ah, how cold and dim
Even summer suns when not beheld with him!
From time to time ill-omened rumors came
Like spirit-tongues muttering the sick man's name
Just ere he dies:--at length those sounds of dread
Fell withering on her soul, "AZIM is dead!"
Oh Grief beyond all other griefs when fate
First leaves the young heart lone and desolate
In the wide world without that only tie
For which it loved to live or feared to die;--
Lorn as the hung-up lute, that near hath spoken
Since the sad day its master-chord was broken!

Fond maid, the sorrow of her soul was such,
Even reason sunk,--blighted beneath its touch;
And tho' ere long her sanguine spirit rose
Above the first dead pressure of its woes,
Tho' health and bloom returned, the delicate chain
Of thought once tangled never cleared again.
Warm, lively, soft as in youth's happiest day,
The mind was still all there, but turned astray,--
A wandering bark upon whose pathway shone
All stars of heaven except the guiding one!
Again she smiled, nay, much and brightly smiled,
But 'twas a lustre, strange, unreal, wild;
And when she sung to her lute's touching strain,
'Twas like the notes, half ecstasy, half pain,
The bulbul[44] utters ere her soul depart,
When, vanquisht by some minstrel's powerful art,
She dies upon the lute whose sweetness broke her heart!

Such was the mood in which that mission found,
Young ZELICA,--that mission which around
The Eastern world in every region blest
With woman's smile sought out its loveliest
To grace that galaxy of lips and eyes
Which the Veiled Prophet destined for the skies:--
And such quick welcome as a spark receives
Dropt on a bed of Autumn's withered leaves,
Did every tale of these enthusiasts find
In the wild maiden's sorrow-blighted mind.
All fire at once the maddening zeal she caught:--
Elect of Paradise! blest, rapturous thought!
Predestined bride, in heaven's eternal dome,
Of some brave youth--ha! durst they say "of _some_?"
No--of the one, one only object traced
In her heart's core too deep to be effaced;
The one whose memory, fresh as life, is twined
With every broken link of her lost mind;
Whose image lives tho' Reason's self be wreckt
Safe mid the ruins of her intellect!

  Alas, poor ZELICA! it needed all
The fantasy which held thy mind in thrall
To see in that gay Haram's glowing maids
A sainted colony for Eden's shades;
Or dream that he,--of whose unholy flame
Thou wert too soon the victim,--shining came
From Paradise to people its pure sphere
With souls like thine which he hath ruined here!
No--had not reason's light totally set,
And left thee dark thou hadst an amulet
In the loved image graven on thy heart
Which would have saved thee from the tempter's art,
And kept alive in all its bloom of breath
That purity whose fading is love's death!--
But lost, inflamed,--a restless zeal took place
Of the mild virgin's still and feminine grace;
First of the Prophets favorites, proudly first
In zeal and charms, too well the Impostor nurst
Her soul's delirium in whose active flame,
Thus lighting up a young, luxuriant frame,
He saw more potent sorceries to bind
To his dark yoke the spirits of mankind,
More subtle chains than hell itself e'er twined.
No art was spared, no witchery;--all the skill
His demons taught him was employed to fill
Her mind with gloom and ecstasy by turns--
That gloom, thro' which Frenzy but fiercer burns,
That ecstasy which from the depth of sadness
Glares like the maniac's moon whose light is madness!

  'Twas from a brilliant banquet where the sound
Of poesy and music breathed around,
Together picturing to her mind and ear
The glories of that heaven, her destined sphere,
Where all was pure, where every stain that lay
Upon the spirit's light should pass away,
And realizing more than youthful love
E'er wisht or dreamed, she should for ever rove
Thro' fields of fragrance by her AZIM'S side,
His own blest, purified, eternal bride!--
T was from a scene, a witching trance like this,
He hurried her away, yet breathing bliss,
To the dim charnel-house;--thro' all its steams
Of damp and death led only by those gleams
Which foul Corruption lights, as with design
To show the gay and proud _she_ too can shine--
And passing on thro' upright ranks of Dead
Which to the maiden, doubly crazed by dread,
Seemed, thro' the bluish death-light round them cast,
To move their lips in mutterings as she past--
There in that awful place, when each had quaft
And pledged in silence such a fearful draught,
Such--oh! the look and taste of that red bowl
Will haunt her till she dies--he bound her soul
By a dark oath, in hell's own language framed,
Never, while earth his mystic presence claimed,
While the blue arch of day hung o'er them both,
Never, by that all-imprecating oath,
In joy or sorrow from his side to sever.--
She swore and the wide charnel echoed "Never, never!"

  From that dread hour, entirely, wildly given
To him and--she believed, lost maid!--to heaven;
Her brain, her heart, her passions all inflamed,
How proud she stood, when in full Haram named
The Priestess of the Faith!--how flasht her eyes
With light, alas, that was not of the skies,
When round in trances only less than hers
She saw the Haram kneel, her prostrate worshippers.
Well might MOKANNA think that form alone
Had spells enough to make the world his own:--
Light, lovely limbs to which the spirit's play
Gave motion, airy as the dancing spray,
When from its stem the small bird wings away;
Lips in whose rosy labyrinth when she smiled
The soul was lost, and blushes, swift and wild
As are the momentary meteors sent
Across the uncalm but beauteous firmament.
And then her look--oh! where's the heart so wise
Could unbewildered meet those matchless eyes?
Quick, restless, strange, but exquisite withal,
Like those of angels just before their fall;
Now shadowed with the shames of earth--now crost
By glimpses of the Heaven her heart had lost;
In every glance there broke without control,
The flashes of a bright but troubled soul,
Where sensibility still wildly played
Like lightning round the ruins it had made!

  And such was now young ZELICA--so changed
From her who some years since delighted ranged
The almond groves that shade BOKHARA'S tide
All life and bliss with AZIM by her side!
So altered was she now, this festal day,
When, mid the proud Divan's dazzling array,
The vision of that Youth whom she had loved,
Had wept as dead, before her breathed and moved;--
When--bright, she thought, as if from Eden's track
But half-way trodden, he had wandered back
Again to earth, glistening with Eden's light--
Her beauteous AZIM shone before her sight.

  O Reason! who shall say what spells renew,
When least we look for it, thy broken clew!
Thro' what small vistas o'er the darkened brain
Thy intellectual day-beam bursts again;
And how like forts to which beleaguerers win
Unhoped-for entrance thro' some friend within,
One clear idea, wakened in the breast
By memory's magic, lets in all the rest.
Would it were thus, unhappy girl, with thee!
But tho' light came, it came but partially;
Enough to show the maze, in which thy sense
Wandered about,--but not to guide it thence;
Enough to glimmer o'er the yawning wave,
But not to point the harbor which might save.
Hours of delight and peace, long left behind,
With that dear form came rushing o'er her mind;
But, oh! to think how deep her soul had gone
In shame and falsehood since those moments shone;
And then her oath--_there_ madness lay again,
And shuddering, back she sunk into her chain
Of mental darkness, as if blest to flee
From light whose every glimpse was agony!
Yet _one_ relief this glance of former years
Brought mingled with its pain,--tears, floods of tears,
Long frozen at her heart, but now like rills
Let loose in spring-time from the snowy hills,
And gushing warm after a sleep of frost,
Thro' valleys where their flow had long been lost.

  Sad and subdued, for the first time her frame
Trembled with horror when the summons came
(A summons proud and rare, which all but she,
And she, till now, had heard with ecstasy,)
To meet MOKANNA at his place of prayer,
A garden oratory cool and fair
By the stream's side, where still at close of day
The Prophet of the Veil retired to pray,
Sometimes alone--but oftener far with one,
One chosen nymph to share his orison.

  Of late none found such favor in his sight
As the young Priestess; and tho', since that night
When the death-cavorns echoed every tone
Of the dire oath that made her all his own,
The Impostor sure of his infatuate prize
Had more than once thrown off his soul's disguise,
And uttered such unheavenly, monstrous things,
As even across the desperate wanderings
Of a weak intellect, whose lamp was out,
Threw startling shadows of dismay and doubt;--
Yet zeal, ambition, her tremendous vow,
The thought, still haunting her, of that bright brow,
Whose blaze, as yet from mortal eye concealed,
Would soon, proud triumph! be to her revealed,
To her alone;--and then the hope, most dear,
Most wild of all, that her transgression here
Was but a passage thro' earth's grosser fire,
From which the spirit would at last aspire,
Even purer than before,--as perfumes rise
Thro' flame and smoke, most welcome to the skies--
And that when AZIM's fond, divine embrace
Should circle her in heaven, no darkening trace
Would on that bosom he once loved remain.
But all be bright, be pure, be _his_ again!--
These were the wildering dreams, whose curst deceit
Had chained her soul beneath the tempter's feet,
And made her think even damning falsehood sweet.
But now that Shape, which had appalled her view,
That Semblance--oh how terrible, if true!
Which came across her frenzy's full career
With shock of consciousness, cold, deep, severe.
As when in northern seas at midnight dark
An isle of ice encounters some swift bark,
And startling all its wretches from their sleep
By one cold impulse hurls them to the deep;--
So came that shock not frenzy's self could bear,
And waking up each long-lulled image there,
But checkt her headlong soul to sink it in despair!

  Wan and dejected, thro' the evening dusk,
She now went slowly to that small kiosk,
Where, pondering alone his impious schemes,
MOKANNA waited her--too wrapt in dreams
Of the fair-ripening future's rich success,
To heed the sorrow, pale and spiritless,
That sat upon his victim's downcast brow,
Or mark how slow her step, how altered now
From the quick, ardent Priestess, whose light bound
Came like a spirit's o'er the unechoing ground,--
From that wild ZELICA whose every glance
Was thrilling fire, whose every thought a trance!

  Upon his couch the Veiled MOKANNA lay,
While lamps around--not such as lend their ray,
Glimmering and cold, to those who nightly pray
In holy KOOM,[45] or MECCA'S dim arcades,--
But brilliant, soft, such lights as lovely maids.
Look loveliest in, shed their luxurious glow
Upon his mystic Veil's white glittering flow.
Beside him, 'stead of beads and books of prayer,
Which the world fondly thought he mused on there,
Stood Vases, filled with KISIIMEE'S[46] golden wine,
And the red weepings of the SHIRAZ vine;
Of which his curtained lips full many a draught
Took zealously, as if each drop they quaft
Like ZEMZEM'S Spring of Holiness[47] had power
To freshen the soul's virtues into flower!
And still he drank and pondered--nor could see
The approaching maid, so deep his revery;
At length with fiendish laugh like that which broke
From EBLIS at the Fall of Man he spoke:--
"Yes, ye vile race, for hell's amusement given,
"Too mean for earth, yet claiming kin with heaven;
"God's images, forsooth!--such gods as he
"Whom INDIA serves, the monkey deity;[48]
"Ye creatures of a breath, proud things of clay,
"To whom if LUCIFER, as gran-dams say,
"Refused tho' at the forfeit of heaven's light
"To bend in worship, LUCIFER was right!
"Soon shall I plant this foot upon the neck
"Of your foul race and without fear or check,
"Luxuriating in hate, avenge my shame,
"My deep-felt, long-nurst loathing of man's name!--
"Soon at the head of myriads, blind and fierce
"As hooded falcons, thro' the universe
"I'll sweep my darkening, desolating way,
"Weak man my instrument, curst man my prey!

  "Ye wise, ye learned, who grope your dull way on
"By the dim twinkling gleams of ages gone,
"Like superstitious thieves who think the light
"From dead men's marrow guides them best at night[49]--
"Ye shall have honors--wealth--yes, Sages, yes--
"I know, grave fools, your wisdom's nothingness;
"Undazzled it can track yon starry sphere,
"But a gilt stick, a bauble blinds it here.
"How I shall laugh, when trumpeted along
"In lying speech and still more lying song,
"By these learned slaves, the meanest of the throng;
"Their wits brought up, their wisdom shrunk so small,
"A sceptre's puny point can wield it all!

  "Ye too, believers of incredible creeds,
"Whose faith enshrines the monsters which it breeds;
"Who, bolder even than NEMROD, think to rise
"By nonsense heapt on nonsense to the skies;
"Ye shall have miracles, ay, sound ones too,
"Seen, heard, attested, everything--but true.
"Your preaching zealots too inspired to seek
"One grace of meaning for the things they speak:
"Your martyrs ready to shed out their blood,
"For truths too heavenly to be understood;
"And your State Priests, sole venders of the lore,
"That works salvation;--as, on AVA'S shore,
"Where none _but_ priests are privileged to trade
"In that best marble of which Gods are made[50];
"They shall have mysteries--ay precious stuff
"For knaves to thrive by--mysteries enough;
"Dark, tangled doctrines, dark as fraud can weave,
"Which simple votaries shall on trust receive,
"While craftier feign belief till they believe.
"A Heaven too ye must have, ye lords of dust,--
"A splendid Paradise,--pure souls, ye must:
"That Prophet ill sustains his holy call,
"Who finds not heavens to suit the tastes of all;
"Houris for boys, omniscience for sages,
"And wings and glories for all ranks and ages.
"Vain things!--as lust or vanity inspires,
"The heaven of each is but what each desires,
"And, soul or sense, whate'er the object be,
"Man would be man to all eternity!
"So let him--EBLIS! grant this crowning curse,
"But keep him what he is, no Hell were worse."

  "Oh my lost soul!" exclaimed the shuddering maid,
Whose ears had drunk like poison all he said:
MOKANNA started--not abasht, afraid,--
He knew no more of fear than one who dwells
Beneath the tropics knows of icicles!
But in those dismal words that reached his ear,
"Oh my lost soul!" there was a sound so drear,
So like that voice among the sinful dead
In which the legend o'er Hell's Gate is read,
That, new as 'twas from her whom naught could dim
Or sink till now, it startled even him.

  "Ha, my fair Priestess!"--thus, with ready wile,
The impostor turned to greet her--"thou whose smile
"Hath inspiration in its rosy beam
"Beyond the Enthusiast's hope or Prophet's dream,
"Light of the Faith! who twin'st religion's zeal
"So close with love's, men know not which they feel,
"Nor which to sigh for, in their trance of heart,
"The heaven thou preachest or the heaven thou art!
"What should I be without thee? without thee
"How dull were power, how joyless victory!
"Tho' borne by angels, if that smile of thine
"Blest not my banner 'twere but half divine.
"But--why so mournful, child? those eyes that shone
"All life last night--what!--is their glory gone?
"Come, come--this morn's fatigue hath made them pale,
"They want rekindling--suns themselves would fail
"Did not their comets bring, as I to thee,
"From light's own fount supplies of brilliancy.
"Thou seest this cup--no juice of earth is here,
"But the pure waters of that upper sphere,
"Whose rills o'er ruby beds and topaz flow,
"Catching the gem's bright color as they go.
"Nightly my Genii come and fill these urns--
"Nay, drink--in every drop life's essence burns;
"'Twill make that soul all fire, those eyes all light--
"Come, come, I want thy loveliest smiles to-night:
"There is a youth--why start?--thou saw'st him then;
"Lookt he not nobly? such the godlike men,
"Thou'lt have to woo thee in the bowers above;--
"Tho' _he_, I fear, hath thoughts too stern for love,
"Too ruled by that cold enemy of bliss
"The world calls virtue--we must conquer this;
"Nay, shrink not, pretty sage! 'tis not for thee
"To scan the mazes of Heaven's mystery:
"The steel must pass thro' fire, ere it can yield
"Fit instruments for mighty hands to wield.
"This very night I mean to try the art
"Of powerful beauty on that warrior's heart.
"All that my Haram boasts of bloom and wit,
"Of skill and charms, most rare and exquisite,
"Shall tempt the boy;--young MIRZALA'S blue eyes
"Whose sleepy lid like snow on violets lies;
"AROUYA'S cheeks warm as a spring-day sun
"And lips that like the seal of SOLOMON
"Have magic in their pressure; ZEBA'S lute,
"And LILLA'S dancing feet that gleam and shoot
"Rapid and white as sea-birds o'er the deep--
"All shall combine their witching powers to steep
"My convert's spirit in that softening trance,
"From which to heaven is but the next advance;--
"That glowing, yielding fusion of the breast.
"On which Religion stamps her image best.
"But hear me, Priestess!--tho' each nymph of these
"Hath some peculiar, practised power to please,
"Some glance or step which at the mirror tried
"First charms herself, then all the world beside:
"There still wants _one_ to make the victory sure,
"One who in every look joins every lure,
"Thro' whom all beauty's beams concentred pass,
"Dazzling and warm as thro' love's burning glass;
"Whose gentle lips persuade without a word,
"Whose words, even when unmeaning, are adored.
"Like inarticulate breathings from a shrine,
"Which our faith takes for granted are divine!
"Such is the nymph we want, all warmth and light,
"To crown the rich temptations of to-night;
"Such the refined enchantress that must be
"This hero's vanquisher,--and thou art she!"

  With her hands claspt, her lips apart and pale,
The maid had stood gazing upon the Veil
From which these words like south winds thro' a fence
Of Kerzrah flowers, came filled with pestilence;[51]
So boldly uttered too! as if all dread
Of frowns from her, of virtuous frowns, were fled,
And the wretch felt assured that once plunged in,
Her woman's soul would know no pause in sin!

  At first, tho' mute she listened, like a dream
Seemed all he said: nor could her mind whose beam
As yet was weak penetrate half his scheme.
But when at length he uttered, "Thou art she!"
All flasht at once and shrieking piteously,
"Oh not for worlds! "she cried--"Great God! to whom
"I once knelt innocent, is this my doom?
"Are all my dreams, my hopes of heavenly bliss,
"My purity, my pride, then come to this,--
"To live, the wanton of a fiend! to be
"The pander of his guilt--oh infamy!
"And sunk myself as low as hell can steep
"In its hot flood, drag others down as deep!

"Others--ha! yes--that youth who came to-day--
"_Not_ him I loved--not him--oh! do but say,
"But swear to me this moment 'tis not he,
"And I will serve, dark fiend, will worship even thee!"

"Beware, young raving thing!--in time beware,
"Nor utter what I can not, must not bear,
"Even from _thy_ lips. Go--try thy lute, thy voice,
"The boy must feel their magic;--I rejoice
"To see those fires, no matter whence they rise,
"Once more illuming my fait Priestess' eyes;
"And should the youth whom soon those eyes shall warm,
"Indeed resemble thy dead lover's form,
"So much the happier wilt thou find thy doom,
"As one warm lover full of life and bloom
"Excels ten thousand cold ones in the tomb.
"Nay, nay, no frowning, sweet!--those eyes were made
"For love, not anger--I must be obeyed."

 "Obeyed!--'tis well--yes, I deserve it all--
"On me, on me Heaven's vengeance can not fall
"Too heavily--but AZIM, brave and true
"And beautiful--must _he_ be ruined too?
"Must _he_ too, glorious as he is, be driven
"A renegade like me from Love and Heaven?
"Like me?--weak wretch, I wrong him--not like me;
"No--he's all truth and strength and purity!
"Fill up your maddening hell-cup to the brim,
"Its witchery, fiends, will have no charm for him.
"Let loose your glowing wantons from their bowers,
"He loves, he loves, and can defy their powers!
"Wretch as I am, in his heart still I reign
"Pure as when first we met, without a stain!
"Tho' ruined--lost--my memory like a charm
"Left by the dead still keeps his soul from harm.
"Oh! never let him know how deep the brow
"He kist at parting is dishonored now;--
"Ne'er tell him how debased, how sunk is she.
"Whom once he loved--once!--_still_ loves dotingly.
"Thou laugh'st, tormentor,--what!--thou it brand my name?
"Do, do--in vain--he'll not believe my shame--
"He thinks me true, that naught beneath God's sky
"Could tempt or change me, and--so once thought I.
"But this is past--tho' worse than death my lot,
"Than hell--'tis nothing while _he_ knows it not.
"Far off to some benighted land I'll fly,
"Where sunbeam ne'er shall enter till I die;
"Where none will ask the lost one whence she came,
"But I may fade and fall without a name.
"And thou--curst man or fiend, whate'er thou art,
"Who found'st this burning plague-spot in my heart,
"And spread'st it--oh, so quick!--thro' soul and frame,
"With more than demon's art, till I became
"A loathsome thing, all pestilence, all flame!--
"If, when I'm gone"--"Hold, fearless maniac, hold,
"Nor tempt my rage--by Heaven, not half so bold
"The puny bird that dares with teasing hum
"Within the crocodile's stretched jaws to come![52]
"And so thou'lt fly, forsooth?--what!--give up all
"Thy chaste dominion in the Haram Hall,
"Where now to Love and now to ALLA given,
"Half mistress and half saint, thou hang'st as even
"As doth MEDINA'S tomb, 'twixt hell and heaven!
"Thou'lt fly?--as easily may reptiles run,
"The gaunt snake once hath fixt his eyes upon;
"As easily, when caught, the prey may be
"Pluckt from his loving folds, as thou from me.
"No, no, 'tis fixt--let good or ill betide,
"Thou'rt mine till death, till death MOKANNA'S bride!
"Hast thou forgot thy oath?"--
    At this dread word,
The Maid whose spirit his rude taunts had stirred
Thro' all its depths and roused an anger there,
That burst and lightened even thro' her despair--
Shrunk back as if a blight were in the breath
That spoke that word and staggered pale as death.

  "Yes, my sworn bride, let others seek in bowers
"Their bridal place--the charnel vault was ours!
"Instead of scents and balms, for thee and me
"Rose the rich steams of sweet mortality,
"Gay, flickering death-lights shone while we were wed.
"And for our guests a row of goodly Dead,
"(Immortal spirits in their time, no doubt,)
"From reeking shrouds upon the rite looked out!
"That oath thou heard'st more lips than thine repeat--
"That cup--thou shudderest, Lady,--was it sweet?
"That cup we pledged, the charnel's choicest wine,
"Hath bound thee--ay--body and soul all mine;
"Bound thee by chains that, whether blest or curst
"No matter now, not hell itself shall burst!
"Hence, woman, to the Haram, and look gay,
"Look wild, look--anything but sad; yet stay--
"One moment more--from what this night hath past,
"I see thou know'st me, know'st me _well_ at last.
"Ha! ha! and so, fond thing, thou thought'st all true,
"And that I love mankind?--I do, I do--
"As victims, love them; as the sea-dog dotes
"Upon the small, sweet fry that round him floats;
"Or, as the Nile-bird loves the slime that gives
"That rank and venomous food on which she lives!--

  "And, now thou seest my _soul's_ angelic hue,
"'Tis time these _features_ were uncurtained too;--
"This brow, whose light--oh rare celestial light!
"Hath been reserved to bless thy favored sight;
"These dazzling eyes before whose shrouded might
"Thou'st seen immortal Man kneel down and quake--
"Would that they _were_ heaven's lightnings for his sake!
"But turn and look--then wonder, if thou wilt,
"That I should hate, should take revenge, by guilt,
"Upon the hand whose mischief or whose mirth
"Sent me thus mained and monstrous upon earth;
"And on that race who, tho' more vile they be
"Than moving apes, are demigods to me!
"Here--judge if hell, with all its power to damn,
"Can add one curse to the foul thing I am!"--
He raised his veil--the Maid turned slowly round,
Looked at him--shrieked--and sunk upon the ground!


On their arrival next night at the place of encampment they were surprised
and delighted to find the groves all around illuminated; some artists of
Yamtcheou[53] having been sent on previously for the purpose. On each
side of the green alley, which led to the Royal Pavilion, artificial
sceneries of bamboo-work were erected, representing arches, minarets,
towers, from which hung thousands of silken lanterns painted by the most
delicate pencils of Canton.--Nothing could be more beautiful than the
leaves of the mango-trees and acacias shining in the light of the
bamboo-scenery which shed a lustre round as soft as that of the nights of
Peristan.

LALLA ROOKH, however, who was too much occupied by the sad story of ZELICA
and her lover to give a thought to anything else, except perhaps him who
related it, hurried on through this scene of splendor to her
pavilion,--greatly to the mortification of the poor artists of
Yamtcheou,--and was followed with equal rapidity by the Great Chamberlain,
cursing, as he went, that ancient Mandarin, whose parental anxiety in
lighting up the shores of the lake, where his beloved daughter had
wandered and been lost, was the origin of these fantastic Chinese
illuminations.[54]

Without a moment's delay, young FERAMORZ was introduced, and FADLADEEN,
who could never make up his mind as to the merits of a poet till he knew
the religious sect to which he belonged, was about to ask him whether he
was a Shia or a Sooni when LALLA KOOKH impatiently clapped her hands for
silence, and the youth being seated upon the musnud near her proceeded:--


Prepare thy soul, young AZIM!--thou hast braved
The bands of GREECE, still mighty tho' enslaved;
Hast faced her phalanx armed with all its fame,--
Her Macedonian pikes and globes of fame,
All this hast fronted with firm heart and brow,
But a more perilous trial waits thee now,--
Woman's bright eyes, a dazzling host of eyes
From every land where woman smiles or sighs;
Of every hue, as Love may chance to raise
His black or azure banner in their blaze;
And each sweet mode of warfare, from the flash
That lightens boldly thro' the shadowy lash,
To the sly, stealing splendors almost hid
Like swords half-sheathed beneath the downcast lid;--
Such, AZIM, is the lovely, luminous host
Now led against thee; and let conquerors boast
Their fields of fame, he who in virtue arms
A young, warm spirit against beauty's charms,
Who feels her brightness, yet defies her thrall,
Is the best, bravest conqueror of them all.

  Now, thro' the Haram chambers, moving lights
And busy shapes proclaim the toilet's rites;--
From room to room the ready handmaids hie,
Some skilled to wreath the turban tastefully,
Or hang the veil in negligence of shade
O'er the warm blushes of the youthful maid,
Who, if between the folds but one eye shone,
Like SEBA'S Queen could vanquish with that one:[55]--

While some bring leaves of Henna to imbue
The fingers' ends with a bright roseate hue,[56]
So bright that in the mirror's depth they seem
Like tips of coral branches in the stream:
And others mix the Kohol's jetty dye,
To give that long, dark languish to the eye,[57]
Which makes the maids whom kings are proud to call
From fair Circassia's vales, so beautiful.
All is in motion; rings and plumes and pearls
Are shining everywhere:--some younger girls
Are gone by moonlight to the garden-beds,
To gather fresh, cool chaplets for their heads;--
Gay creatures! sweet, tho' mournful, 'tis to see
How each prefers a garland from that tree
Which brings to mind her childhood's innocent day
And the dear fields and friendships far away.
The maid of INDIA, blest again to hold
In her full lap the Champac's leaves of gold,[58]
Thinks of the time when, by the GANGES' flood,
Her little playmates scattered many a bud
Upon her long black hair with glossy gleam
Just dripping from the consecrated stream;
While the young Arab haunted by the smell
Of her own mountain flowers as by a spell,--
The sweet Alcaya[59] and that courteous tree
Which bows to all who seek its canopy,[60]
Sees called up round her by these magic scents
The well, the camels, and her father's tents;
Sighs for the home she left with little pain,
And wishes even its sorrow back again!

  Meanwhile thro' vast illuminated halls,
Silent and bright, where nothing but the falls
Of fragrant waters gushing with cool sound
From many a jasper fount is heard around,
Young AZIM roams bewildered,--nor can guess
What means this maze of light and loneliness.
Here the way leads o'er tesselated floors
Or mats of CAIRO thro' long corridors,
Where ranged in cassolets and silver urns
Sweet wood of aloe or of sandal burns,
And spicy rods such as illume at night
The bowers of TIBET[61] send forth odorous light,
Like Peris' wands, when pointing out the road
For some pure Spirit to its blest abode:--
And here at once the glittering saloon
Bursts on his sight, boundless and bright as noon;
Where in the midst reflecting back the rays
In broken rainbows a fresh fountain plays
High as the enamelled cupola which towers
All rich with Arabesques of gold and flowers:
And the mosaic floor beneath shines thro'
The sprinkling of that fountain's silvery dew,
Like the wet, glistening shells of every dye
That on the margin of the Red Sea lie.

  Here too he traces the kind visitings
Of woman's love in those fair, living things
Of land and wave, whose fate--in bondage thrown
For their weak loveliness--is like her own!
On one side gleaming with a sudden grace
Thro' water brilliant as the crystal vase
In which it undulates, small fishes shine
Like golden ingots from a fairy mine;--
While, on the other, latticed lightly in
With odoriferous woods of COMORIN,
Each brilliant bird that wings the air is seen;--
Gay, sparkling loories such as gleam between
The crimson blossoms of the coral-tree[62]
In the warm isles of India's sunny sea:
Mecca's blue sacred pigeon,[63] and the thrush
Of Hindostan[64] whose holy warblings gush
At evening from the tall pagoda's top;--
Those golden birds that in the spice time drop
About the gardens, drunk with that sweet food[65]
Whose scent hath lured them o'er the summer flood;[66]
And those that under Araby's soft sun
Build their high nests of budding cinnamon;[67]
In short, all rare and beauteous things that fly
Thro' the pure element here calmly lie
Sleeping in light, like the green birds[68] that dwell
In Eden's radiant fields of asphodel!

  So on, thro' scenes past all imagining,
More like the luxuries of that impious King,[69]
Whom Death's dark Angel with his lightning torch
Struck down and blasted even in Pleasure's porch,
Than the pure dwelling of a Prophet sent
Armed with Heaven's sword for man's enfranchisement--
Young AZIM wandered, looking sternly round,
His simple garb and war-boots clanking sound
But ill according with the pomp and grace
And silent lull of that voluptuous place.

  "Is this, then," thought the youth, "is this the way
"To free man's spirit from the deadening sway
"Of worldly sloth,--to teach him while he lives
"To know no bliss but that which virtue gives,
"And when he dies to leave his lofty name
"A light, a landmark on the cliffs of fame?
"It was not so, Land of the generous thought
"And daring deed, thy god-like sages taught;
"It was not thus in bowers of wanton ease
"Thy Freedom nurst her sacred energies;
"Oh! not beneath the enfeebling, withering glow
"Of such dull luxury did those myrtles grow
"With which she wreathed her sword when she would dare
"Immortal deeds; but in the bracing air
"Of toil,--of temperance,--of that high, rare,
"Ethereal virtue, which alone can breathe
"Life, health, and lustre into Freedom's wreath.
"Who that surveys this span of earth we press.--
"This speck of life in time's great wilderness,
"This narrow isthmus 'twixt two boundless seas,
"The past, the future, two eternities!--
"Would sully the bright spot, or leave it bare,
"When he might build him a proud temple there,
"A name that long shall hallow all its space,
"And be each purer soul's high resting-place.
"But no--it cannot be, that one whom God
"Has sent to break the wizard Falsehood's rod,--
"A Prophet of the Truth, whose mission draws
"Its rights from Heaven, should thus profane its cause
"With the world's vulgar pomps;--no, no,--I see--
"He thinks me weak--this glare of luxury
"Is but to tempt, to try the eaglet gaze
"Of my young soul--shine on, 'twill stand the blaze!"

  So thought the youth;--but even while he defied
This witching scene he felt its witchery glide
Thro' every sense. The perfume breathing round,
Like a pervading spirit;--the still sound
Of falling waters, lulling as the song
Of Indian bees at sunset when they throng
Around the fragrant NILICA, and deep
In its blue blossoms hum themselves to sleep;[70]
And music, too--dear music! that can touch
Beyond all else the soul that loves it much--
Now heard far off, so far as but to seem
Like the faint, exquisite music of a dream;
All was too much for him, too full of bliss,
The heart could nothing feel, that felt not this;
Softened he sunk upon a couch and gave
His soul up to sweet thoughts like wave on wave
Succeeding in smooth seas when storms are laid;
He thought of ZELICA, his own dear maid,
And of the time when full of blissful sighs
They sat and lookt into each other's eyes,
Silent and happy--as if God had given
Naught else worth looking at on this side heaven.

  "Oh, my loved mistress, thou whose spirit still
"Is with me, round me, wander where I will--
"It is for thee, for thee alone I seek
"The paths of glory; to light up thy cheek
"With warm approval--in that gentle look
"To read my praise as in an angel's book,
"And think all toils rewarded when from thee
"I gain a smile worth immortality!
"How shall I bear the moment, when restored
"To that young heart where I alone am Lord.
"Tho' of such bliss unworthy,--since the best
"Alone deserve to be the happiest:--
"When from those lips unbreathed upon for years
"I shall again kiss off the soul-felt tears,
"And find those tears warm as when last they started,
"Those sacred kisses pure as when we parted.
"O my own life!--why should a single day,
"A moment keep me from those arms away?"

While thus he thinks, still nearer on the breeze
Come those delicious, dream-like harmonies,
Each note of which but adds new, downy links
To the soft chain in which his spirit sinks.
He turns him toward the sound, and far away
Thro' a long vista sparkling with the play
Of countless lamps,--like the rich track which Day
Leaves on the waters, when he sinks from us,
So long the path, its light so tremulous;--
He sees a group of female forms advance,
Some chained together in the mazy dance
By fetters forged in the green sunny bowers,
As they were captives to the King of Flowers;[71]
And some disporting round, unlinkt and free,
Who seemed to mock their sisters' slavery;
And round and round them still in wheeling flight
Went like gay moths about a lamp at night;
While others waked, as gracefully along
Their feet kept time, the very soul of song
From psaltery, pipe, and lutes of heavenly thrill,
Or their own youthful voices heavenlier still.
And now they come, now pass before his eye,
Forms such as Nature moulds when she would vie
With Fancy's pencil and give birth to things
Lovely beyond its fairest picturings.
Awhile they dance before him, then divide,
Breaking like rosy clouds at eventide
Around the rich pavilion of the sun,--
Till silently dispersing, one by one,
Thro' many a path that from the chamber leads
To gardens, terraces and moonlight meads,
Their distant laughter comes upon the wind,
And but one trembling nymph remains behind,--
Beckoning them back in vain--for they are gone
And she is left in all that light alone;
No veil to curtain o'er her beauteous brow,
In its young bashfulness more beauteous now;
But a light golden chain-work round her hair,[72]
Such as the maids of YEZD and SHIRAS wear,[73]
From which on either side gracefully hung
A golden amulet in the Arab tongue,
Engraven o'er with some immortal line
From Holy Writ or bard scarce less divine;
While her left hand, as shrinkingly she stood,
Held a small lute of gold and sandal-wood,
Which once or twice she touched with hurried strain,
Then took her trembling fingers off again.
But when at length a timid glance she stole
At AZIM, the sweet gravity of soul
She saw thro' all his features calmed her fear,
And like a half-tamed antelope more near,
Tho' shrinking still, she came;--then sat her down
Upon a musnud's[74] edge, and, bolder grown.
In the pathetic mode of ISFAHAN[75]
Touched a preluding strain and thus began:--

There's a bower of roses by BENDEMEER's[76] stream,
  And the nightingale sings round it all the day long;
In the time of my childhood 'twas like a sweet dream,
  To sit in the roses and hear the bird's song.

That bower and its music, I never forget,
  But oft when alone in the bloom of the year
I think--is the nightingale singing there yet?
  Are the roses still bright by the calm BENDEMEER?

No, the roses soon withered that hung o'er the wave,
  But some blossoms were gathered while freshly they shone.
And a dew was distilled from their flowers that gave
  All the fragrance of summer when summer was gone.

Thus memory draws from delight ere it dies
  An essence that breathes of it many a year;
Thus bright to my soul, as 'twas then to my eyes,
  Is that bower on the banks of the calm BENDEMEER!

  "Poor maiden!" thought the youth, "if thou wert sent
"With thy soft lute and beauty's blandishment
"To wake unholy wishes in this heart,
"Or tempt its truth, thou little know'st the art.
"For tho' thy lips should sweetly counsel wrong,
"Those vestal eyes would disavow its song.
"But thou hast breathed such purity, thy lay
"Returns so fondly to youth's virtuous day,
"And leads thy soul--if e'er it wandered thence--
"So gently back to its first innocence,
"That I would sooner stop the unchained dove,
"When swift returning to its home of love,
"And round its snowy wing new fetters twine.
"Than turn from virtue one pure wish of thine!"

  Scarce had this feeling past, when sparkling thro'
The gently open'd curtains of light blue
That veiled the breezy casement, countless eyes
Peeping like stars thro' the blue evening skies,
Looked laughing in as if to mock the pair
That sat so still and melancholy there:--
And now the curtains fly apart and in
From the cool air mid showers of jessamine
Which those without fling after them in play,
Two lightsome maidens spring,--lightsome as they
Who live in the air on odors,--and around
The bright saloon, scarce conscious of the ground,
Chase one another in a varying dance
Of mirth and languor, coyness and advance,
Too eloquently like love's warm pursuit:--
While she who sung so gently to the lute
Her dream of home steals timidly away,
Shrinking as violets do in summer's ray,--
But takes with her from AZIM'S heart that sigh
We sometimes give to forms that pass us by
In the world's crowd, too lovely to remain,
Creatures of light we never see again!

  Around the white necks of the nymphs who danced
Hung carcanets of orient gems that glanced
More brilliant than the sea-glass glittering o'er
The hills of crystal on the Caspian shore;[77]
While from their long, dark tresses, in a fall
Of curls descending, bells as musical
As those that on the golden-shafted trees
Of EDEN shake in the eternal breeze,[78]
Rung round their steps, at every bound more sweet.
As 'twere the ecstatic language of their feet.
At length the chase was o'er, and they stood wreathed
Within each other's arms; while soft there breathed
Thro' the cool casement, mingled with the sighs
Of moonlight flowers, music that seemed to rise
From some still lake, so liquidly it rose;
And as it swelled again at each faint close
The ear could track thro' all that maze of chords
And young sweet voices these impassioned words:--

A SPIRIT there is whose fragrant sigh
  Is burning now thro' earth and air;
Where cheeks are blushing the Spirit is nigh,
  Where lips are meeting the Spirit is there!

His breath is the soul of flowers like these,
  And his floating eyes--oh! they resemble[79]
Blue water-lilies,[80] when the breeze
  Is making the stream around them tremble.

Hail to thee, hail to thee, kindling power!
  Spirit of Love, Spirit of Bliss!
Thy holiest time is the moonlight hour,
  And there never was moonlight so sweet as this.

By the fair and brave
  Who blushing unite,
Like the sun and wave,
  When they meet at night;

By the tear that shows
  When passion is nigh,
As the rain-drop flows
  From the heat of the sky;

By the first love-beat
  Of the youthful heart,
By the bliss to meet,
  And the pain to part;

By all that thou hast
  To mortals given,
Which--oh, could it last,
  This earth were heaven!

We call thee thither, entrancing Power!
  Spirit of Love! Spirit of Bliss!
Thy holiest time is the moonlight hour,
  And there never was moonlight so sweet as this.

Impatient of a scene whose luxuries stole,
Spite of himself, too deep into his soul,
And where, midst all that the young heart loves most,
Flowers, music, smiles, to yield was to be lost,
The youth had started up and turned away
From the light nymphs and their luxurious lay
To muse upon the pictures that hung round,--[81]
Bright images, that spoke without a sound,
And views like vistas into fairy ground.
But here again new spells came o'er his sense:--
All that the pencil's mute omnipotence
Could call up into life, of soft and fair,
Of fond and passionate, was glowing there;
Nor yet too warm, but touched with that fine art
Which paints of pleasure but the purer part;
Which knows even Beauty when half-veiled is best,--
Like her own radiant planet of the west,
Whose orb when half retired looks loveliest.[82]
_There_ hung the history of the Genii-King,
Traced thro' each gay, voluptuous wandering
With her from SABA'S bowers, in whose bright eyes
He read that to be blest is to be wise;--
_Here_ fond ZULEIKA woos with open arms[83]
The Hebrew boy who flies from her young charms,
Yet flying turns to gaze and half undone
Wishes that Heaven and she could _both_ be won;
And here MOHAMMED born for love and guile
Forgets the Koran in his MARY'S smile;--
Then beckons some kind angel from above
With a new text to consecrate their love.[84]

With rapid step, yet pleased and lingering eye,
Did the youth pass these pictured stories by,
And hastened to a casement where the light
Of the calm moon came in and freshly bright
The fields without were seen sleeping as still
As if no life remained in breeze or rill.
Here paused he while the music now less near
Breathed with a holier language on his ear,
As tho' the distance and that heavenly ray
Thro' which the sounds came floating took away
All that had been too earthly in the lay.

Oh! could he listen to such sounds unmoved,
And by that light--nor dream of her he loved?
Dream on, unconscious boy! while yet thou may'st;
'Tis the last bliss thy soul shall ever taste.
Clasp yet awhile her image to thy heart,
Ere all the light that made it dear depart.
Think of her smiles as when thou saw'st them last,
Clear, beautiful, by naught of earth o'ercast;
Recall her tears to thee at parting given,
Pure as they weep, _if_ angels weep in Heaven.
Think in her own still bower she waits thee now
With the same glow of heart and bloom of brow,
Yet shrined in solitude--thine all, thine only,
Like the one star above thee, bright and lonely.
Oh! that a dream so sweet, so long enjoyed,
Should be so sadly, cruelly destroyed!

The song is husht, the laughing nymphs are flown,
And he is left musing of bliss alone;--
Alone?--no, not alone--that heavy sigh,
That sob of grief which broke from some one nigh--
Whose could it be?--alas! is misery found
Here, even here, on this enchanted ground?
He turns and sees a female form close veiled,
Leaning, as if both heart and strength had failed,
Against a pillar near;--not glittering o'er
With gems and wreaths such as the others wore,
But in that deep-blue, melancholy dress.[85]
BOKHARA'S maidens wear in mindfulness
Of friends or kindred, dead or far away;--
And such as ZELICA had on that day
He left her--when with heart too full to speak
He took away her last warm tears upon his cheek.

A strange emotion stirs within him,--more
Than mere compassion ever waked before;
Unconsciously he opes his arms while she
Springs forward as with life's last energy,
But, swooning in that one convulsive bound,
Sinks ere she reach his arms upon the ground;--
Her veil falls off--her faint hands clasp his knees--
'Tis she herself!--it is ZELICA he sees!
But, ah, so pale, so changed--none but a lover
Could in that wreck of beauty's shrine discover
The once adorned divinity--even he
Stood for some moments mute, and doubtingly
Put back the ringlets from her brow, and gazed
Upon those lids where once such lustre blazed,
Ere he could think she was _indeed_ his own,
Own darling maid whom he so long had known
In joy and sorrow, beautiful in both;
Who, even when grief was heaviest--when loath
He left her for the wars--in that worst hour
Sat in her sorrow like the sweet night-flower,[86]
When darkness brings its weeping glories out,
And spreads its sighs like frankincense about.

  "Look up, my ZELICA--one moment show
"Those gentle eyes to me that I may know
"Thy life, thy loveliness is not all gone,
"But _there_ at least shines as it ever shone.
"Come, look upon thy AZIM--one dear glance,
"Like those of old, were heaven! whatever chance
"Hath brought thee here, oh, 'twas a blessed one!
"There--my loved lips--they move--that kiss hath run
"Like the first shoot of life thro' every vein,
"And now I clasp her, mine, all mine again.
"Oh the delight--now, in this very hour,
"When had the whole rich world been in my power,
"I should have singled out thee only thee,
"From the whole world's collected treasury--
"To have thee here--to hang thus fondly o'er
"My own, best, purest ZELICA once more!"

  It was indeed the touch of those fond lips
Upon her eyes that chased their short eclipse.
And gradual as the snow at Heaven's breath
Melts off and shows the azure flowers beneath,
Her lids unclosed and the bright eyes were seen
Gazing on his--not, as they late had been,
Quick, restless, wild, but mournfully serene;
As if to lie even for that tranced minute
So near his heart had consolation in it;
And thus to wake in his beloved caress
Took from her soul one half its wretchedness.
But, when she heard him call her good and pure,
Oh! 'twas too much--too dreadful to endure!
Shuddering she broke away from his embrace.
And hiding with both hands her guilty face
Said in a tone whose anguish would have riven
A heart of very marble, "Pure!--oh Heaven!"--

  That tone--those looks so changed--the withering blight,
That sin and sorrow leave where'er they light:
The dead despondency of those sunk eyes,
Where once, had he thus met her by surprise,
He would have seen himself, too happy boy,
Reflected in a thousand lights of joy:
And then the place,--that bright, unholy place,
Where vice lay hid beneath each winning grace
And charm of luxury as the viper weaves
Its wily covering of sweet balsam leaves,[87]--
All struck upon his heart, sudden and cold
As death itself;--it needs not to be told--
No, no--he sees it all plain as the brand
Of burning shame can mark--whate'er the hand,
That could from Heaven and him such brightness sever,
'Tis done--to Heaven and him she's lost for ever!
It was a dreadful moment; not the tears,
The lingering, lasting misery of years
Could match that minute's anguish--all the worst
Of sorrow's elements in that dark burst
Broke o'er his soul and with one crash of fate
Laid the whole hopes of his life desolate.

  "Oh! curse me not," she cried, as wild he tost
His desperate hand towards Heav'n--"tho' I am lost,
"Think not that guilt, that falsehood made me fall,
"No, no--'twas grief, 'twas madness did it all!
"Nay, doubt me not--tho' all thy love hath ceased--
"I know it hath--yet, yet believe, at least,
"That every spark of reason's light must be
"Quenched in this brain ere I could stray from thee.
"They told me thou wert dead--why, AZIM, why
"Did we not, both of us, that instant die
"When we were parted? oh! couldst thou but know
"With what a deep devotedness of woe
"I wept thy absence--o'er and o'er again
"Thinking of thee, still thee, till thought grew pain,
"And memory like a drop that night and day
"Falls cold and ceaseless wore my heart away.
"Didst thou but know how pale I sat at home,
"My eyes still turned the way thou wert to come,
"And, all the long, long night of hope and fear,
"Thy voice and step still sounding in my ear--
"Oh God! thou wouldst not wonder that at last,
"When every hope was all at once o'ercast,
"When I heard frightful voices round me say
"_Azim is dead_!--this wretched brain gave way,
"And I became a wreck, at random driven,
"Without one glimpse of reason or of Heaven--
"All wild--and even this quenchless love within
"Turned to foul fires to light me into sin!--
"Thou pitiest me--I knew thou wouldst--that sky
"Hath naught beneath it half so lorn as I.
"The fiend, who lured me hither--hist! come near.
"Or thou too, _thou_ art lost, if he should hear--
"Told me such things--oh! with such devilish art.
"As would have ruined even a holier heart--
"Of thee, and of that ever-radiant sphere,
"Where blest at length, if I but served him here,
"I should for ever live in thy dear sight.
"And drink from those pure eyes eternal light.
"Think, think how lost, how maddened I must be,
"To hope that guilt could lead to God or thee!
"Thou weep'st for me--do weep--oh, that I durst
"Kiss off that tear! but, no--these lips are curst,
"They must not touch thee;--one divine caress,
"One blessed moment of forgetfulness
"I've had within those arms and _that_ shall lie
"Shrined in my soul's deep memory till I die;
"The last of joy's last relics here below,
"The one sweet drop, in all this waste of woe,
"My heart has treasured from affection's spring,
"To soothe and cool its deadly withering!
"But thou--yes, thou must go--for ever go;
"This place is not for thee--for thee! oh no,
"Did I but tell thee half, thy tortured brain
"Would burn like mine, and mine go wild again!
"Enough that Guilt reigns here--that hearts once good
"Now tainted, chilled and broken are his food.--
"Enough that we are parted--that there rolls
"A flood of headlong fate between our souls,
"Whose darkness severs me as wide from thee
"As hell from heaven to all eternity!"

  "ZELICA, ZELICA!" the youth exclaimed.
In all the tortures of a mind inflamed
Almost to madness--"by that sacred Heaven,
"Where yet, if prayers can move, thou'lt be forgiven,
"As thou art here--here, in this writhing heart,
"All sinful, wild, and ruined as thou art!
"By the remembrance of our once pure love,
"Which like a church-yard light still burns above
"The grave of our lost souls--which guilt in thee
"Cannot extinguish nor despair in me!
"I do conjure, implore thee to fly hence--
"If thou hast yet one spark of innocence,
"Fly with me from this place"--
    "With thee! oh bliss!
"'Tis worth whole years of torment to hear this.
"What! take the lost one with thee?--let her rove
"By thy dear side, as in those days of love,
"When we were both so happy, both so pure--
"Too heavenly dream! if there's on earth a cure
"For the sunk heart, 'tis this--day after day
"To be the blest companion of thy way;
"To hear thy angel eloquence--to see
"Those virtuous eyes for ever turned on me;
"And in their light re-chastened silently,
"Like the stained web that whitens in the sun,
"Grow pure by being purely shone upon!
"And thou wilt pray for me--I know thou wilt--
"At the dim vesper hour when thoughts of guilt
"Come heaviest o'er the heart thou'lt lift thine eyes
"Full of sweet tears unto the darkening skies
"And plead for me with Heaven till I can dare
"To fix my own weak, sinful glances there;
"Till the good angels when they see me cling
"For ever near thee, pale and sorrowing,
"Shall for thy sake pronounce my soul forgiven,
"And bid thee take thy weeping slave to Heaven!
"Oh yes, I'll fly with thee"--
    Scarce had she said
These breathless words when a voice deep and dread
As that of MONKER waking up the dead
From their first sleep--so startling 'twas to both--
Rang thro' the casement near, "Thy oath! thy oath!"
Oh Heaven, the ghastliness of that Maid's look!--
"'Tis he," faintly she cried, while terror shook
Her inmost core, nor durst she lift her eyes,
Tho' thro' the casement, now naught but the skies
And moonlight fields were seen, calm as before--
"'Tis he, and I am his--all, all is o'er--
"Go--fly this instant, or thou'rt ruin'd too--
"My oath, my oath, oh God! 'tis all too true,
"True as the worm in this cold heart it is--
"I am MOKANNA'S bride--his, AZIM, his--
"The Dead stood round us while I spoke that vow,
"Their blue lips echoed it--I hear them now!
"Their eyes glared on me, while I pledged that bowl,
"'Twas burning blood--I feel it in my soul!
"And the Veiled Bridegroom--hist! I've seen to-night
"What angels know not of--so foul a sight.
"So horrible--oh! never may'st thou see
"What _there_ lies hid from all but hell and me!
"But I must hence--off, off--I am not thine,
"Nor Heaven's, nor Love's, nor aught that is divine--
"Hold me not--ha! think'st thou the fiends that sever
"Hearts cannot sunder hands?--thus, then--for ever!"

With all that strength which madness lends the weak
She flung away his arm; and with a shriek
Whose sound tho' be should linger out more years
Than wretch e'er told can never leave his ears--
Flew up thro' that long avenue of light,
Fleetly as some dark, ominous bird of night,
Across the sun; and soon was out of sight!


LALLA ROOKH could think of nothing all day but the misery of those two
young lovers. Her gayety was gone, and she looked pensively even upon
FADLAPEEN. She felt, too, without knowing why, a sort of uneasy pleasure
in imagining that AZIM must have been just such a youth as FERAMORZ; just
as worthy to enjoy all the blessings, without any of the pangs, of that
illusive passion, which too often like the sunny apples of Istkahar[88]
is all sweetness on one side and all bitterness on the other.

As they passed along a sequestered river after sunset they saw a young
Hindoo girl upon the bank, whose employment seemed to them so strange that
they stopped their palankeens to observe her. She had lighted a small lamp
filled with oil of cocoa, and placing it in an earthen dish adorned with a
wreath of flowers, had committed it with a trembling hand to the stream;
and was now anxiously watching its progress down the current, heedless of
the gay cavalcade which had drawn up beside her. LALLA ROOKH was all
curiosity;--when one of her attendants, who had lived upon the banks of
the Ganges, (where this ceremony is so frequent that often in the dusk of
the evening the river is seen glittering all over with lights, like the
Oton-tala or Sea of Stars,)[89] informed the princess that it was the
usual way in which the friends of those who had gone on dangerous voyages
offered up vows for their safe return. If the lamp sunk immediately the
omen was disastrous; but if it went shining down the stream and continued
to burn till entirely out of sight, the return of the beloved object was
considered as certain.

LALLA ROOKH as they moved on more than once looked back to observe how the
young Hindoo's lamp proceeded; and while she saw with pleasure that it was
still unextinguished she could not help fearing that all the hopes of this
life were no better than that feeble light upon the river. The remainder
of the journey was passed in silence. She now for the first time felt that
shade of melancholy which comes over the youthful maiden's heart as sweet
and transient as her own breath upon a mirror; nor was it till she heard
the lute of FERAMOKZ, touched lightly at the door of her pavilion that she
waked from the revery in which she had been wandering. Instantly her eyes
were lighted up with pleasure; and after a few unheard remarks from
FADLADEEN upon the indecorum of a poet seating himself in presence of a
Princess everything was arranged as on the preceding evening and all
listened with eagerness while the story was thus continued:--


Whose are the gilded tents that crowd the way,
Where all was waste and silent yesterday?
This City of War which, in a few short hours,
Hath sprung up here, as if the magic powers[90]
Of Him who, in the twinkling of a star,
Built the high pillared halls of CHILMINAR,[91]
Had conjur'd up, far as the eye can see,
This world of tents and domes and sunbright armory:--
Princely pavilions screened by many a fold
Of crimson cloth and topt with balls of gold:--
Steeds with their housings of rich silver spun,
Their chains and poitrels glittering in the sun;
And camels tufted o'er with Yemen's shells[92]
Shaking in every breeze their light-toned bells!

But yester-eve, so motionless around,
So mute was this wide plain that not a sound
But the far torrent or the locust bird[93]
Hunting among thickets could be heard;--
Yet hark! what discords now of every kind,
Shouts, laughs, and screams are revelling in the wind;
The neigh of cavalry;--the tinkling throngs
Of laden camels and their drivers' songs;--
Ringing of arms, and flapping in the breeze
Of streamers from ten thousand canopies;--[94]
War-music bursting out from time to time
With gong and tymbalon's tremendous chime;--
Or in the pause when harsher sounds are mute,
The mellow breathings of some horn or flute,
That far off, broken by the eagle note
Of the Abyssinian trumpet, swell and float.[95]

Who leads this mighty army?--ask ye "who?"
And mark ye not those banners of dark hue,
The Night and Shadow, over yonder tent?--[96]
It is the CALIPH'S glorious armament.
Roused in his Palace by the dread alarms,
That hourly came, of the false Prophet's arms,
And of his host of infidels who hurled
Defiance fierce at Islam and the world,[97]
Tho' worn with Grecian warfare, and behind
The veils of his bright Palace calm reclined,
Yet brooked he not such blasphemy should stain,
Thus unrevenged, the evening of his reign;
But having sworn upon the Holy Grave[98]
To conquer or to perish, once more gave
His shadowy banners proudly to the breeze,
And with an army nurst in victories,
Here stands to crush the rebels that o'errun
His blest and beauteous Province of the Sun.

Ne'er did the march of MAHADI display
Such pomp before;--not even when on his way
To MECCA'S Temple, when both land and sea
Were spoiled to feed the Pilgrim's luxury;[99]
When round him mid the burning sands he saw
Fruits of the North in icy freshness thaw,
And cooled his thirsty lip beneath the glow
Of MECCA'S sun with urns of Persian snow:--
Nor e'er did armament more grand than that
Pour from the kingdoms of the Caliphat.
First, in the van, the People of the Rock[100]
On their light mountain steeds of royal stock:[101]
Then chieftains of DAMASCUS proud to see
The flashing of their swords' rich marquetry;--[102]
Men from the regions near the VOLGA'S mouth
Mixt with the rude, black archers of the South;
And Indian lancers in white-turbaned ranks
From the far SINDE or ATTOCK'S sacred banks,
With dusky legions from the Land of Myrrh,[103]
And many a mace-armed Moor and Midsea islander.

Nor less in number tho' more new and rude
In warfare's school was the vast multitude
That, fired by zeal or by oppression wronged,
Round the white standard of the impostor thronged.
Beside his thousands of Believers--blind,
Burning and headlong as the Samiel wind--
Many who felt and more who feared to feel
The bloody Islamite's converting steel,
Flockt to his banner;--Chiefs of the UZBEK race,
Waving their heron crests with martial grace;[104]
TURKOMANS, countless as their flocks, led forth
From the aromatic pastures of the North;
Wild warriors of the turquoise hills,--and those[105]
Who dwell beyond the everlasting snows
Of HINDOO KOSH, in stormy freedom bred,
Their fort the rock, their camp the torrent's bed.
But none of all who owned the Chief's command
Rushed to that battle-field with bolder hand
Or sterner hate than IRAN'S outlawed men,
Her Worshippers of Fire--all panting then[106]
For vengeance on the accursed Saracen;
Vengeance at last for their dear country spurned,
Her throne usurpt, and her bright shrines o'erturned.

From YEZD'S eternal Mansion of the Fire[107]
Where aged saints in dreams of Heaven expire:
From BADKU and those fountains of blue flame
That burn into the CASPIAN, fierce they came,[108]
Careless for what or whom the blow was sped,
So vengeance triumpht and their tyrants bled.

Such was the wild and miscellaneous host
That high in air their motley banners tost
Around the Prophet-Chief--all eyes still bent
Upon that glittering Veil, where'er it went,
That beacon thro' the battle's stormy flood,
That rainbow of the field whose showers were blood!

Twice hath the sun upon their conflict set
And risen again and found them grappling yet;
While streams of carnage in his noontide blaze,
Smoke up to Heaven--hot as that crimson haze
By which the prostrate Caravan is awed[109]
In the red Desert when the wind's abroad.
"Oh, Swords of God!" the panting CALIPH calls,--
"Thrones for the living--Heaven for him who falls!"--
"On, brave avengers, on," MOKANNA cries,
"And EBLIS blast the recreant slave that flies!"
Now comes the brunt, the crisis of the day--
They clash--they strive--the CALIPH'S troops give way!
MOKANNA'S self plucks the black Banner down,
And now the Orient World's Imperial crown
Is just within his grasp--when, hark, that shout!
Some hand hath checkt the flying Moslem's rout;
And now they turn, they rally--at their head
A warrior, (like those angel youths who led,
In glorious panoply of Heaven's own mail,
The Champions of the Faith thro BEDER'S vale,)[110]
Bold as if gifted with ten thousand lives,
Turns on the fierce pursuers' blades, and drives
At once the multitudinous torrent back--
While hope and courage kindle in his track;
And at each step his bloody falchion makes
Terrible vistas thro' which victory breaks!
In vain MOKANNA, midst the general flight,
Stands like the red moon on some stormy night
Among the fugitive clouds that hurrying by
Leave only her unshaken in the sky--
In vain he yells his desperate curses out,
Deals death promiscuously to all about,
To foes that charge and coward friends that fly,
And seems of _all_ the Great Archenemy.
The panic spreads--"A miracle!" throughout
The Moslem ranks, "a miracle!" they shout,
All gazing on that youth whose coming seems
A light, a glory, such as breaks in dreams;
And every sword, true as o'er billows dim
The needle tracks the lode-star, following him!

Right towards MOKANNA now he cleaves his path,
Impatient cleaves as tho' the bolt of wrath
He bears from Heaven withheld its awful burst
From weaker heads and souls but half way curst,
To break o'er Him, the mightiest and the worst!
But vain his speed--tho', in that hour of blood,
Had all God's seraphs round MOKANNA stood
With swords o'fire ready like fate to fall,
MOKANNA'S soul would have defied them all;
Yet now, the rush of fugitives, too strong
For human force, hurries even _him_ along;
In vain he struggles mid the wedged array
Of flying thousands--he is borne away;
And the sole joy his baffled spirit knows,
In this forced flight, is--murdering as he goes!
As a grim tiger whom the torrent's might
Surprises in some parched ravine at night,
Turns even in drowning on the wretched flocks
Swept with him in that snow-flood from the rocks,
And, to the last, devouring on his way,
Bloodies the stream lie hath not power to stay.

"Alla illa Alla!"--the glad shout renew--
"Alla Akbar"--the Caliph's in MEROU.[111]
Hang out your gilded tapestry in the streets,
And light your shrines and chant your ziraleets.[112]
The swords of God have triumpht--on his throne
Your Caliph sits and the veiled Chief hath flown.
Who does not envy that young warrior now
To whom the Lord of Islam bends his brow,
In all the graceful gratitude of power,
For his throne's safety in that perilous hour?
Who doth not wonder, when, amidst the acclaim
Of thousands heralding to heaven his name--
Mid all those holier harmonies of fame
Which sound along the path of virtuous souls,
Like music round a planet as it rolls,--
He turns away--coldly, as if some gloom
Hung o'er his heart no triumphs can illume;--
Some sightless grief upon whose blasted gaze
Tho' glory's light may play, in vain it plays.
Yes, wretched AZIM! thine is such a grief,
Beyond all hope, all terror, all relief!
A dark, cold calm, which nothing now can break.
Or warm or brighten,--Like that Syrian Lake[113]
Upon whose surface morn and summer shed
Their smiles in vain, for all beneath is dead!--
Hearts there have been o'er which this weight of woe
Came by long use of suffering, tame and slow;
But thine, lost youth! was sudden--over thee
It broke at once, when all seemed ecstasy;
When Hope lookt up and saw the gloomy Past
Melt into splendor and Bliss dawn at last--
'Twas then, even then, o'er joys so freshly blown
This mortal blight of misery came down;
Even then, the full, warm gushings of thy heart
Were checkt--like fount-drops, frozen as they start--
And there like them cold, sunless relics hang,
Each fixt and chilled into a lasting pang.

One sole desire, one passion now remains
To keep life's fever still within his veins,
Vengeance!--dire vengeance on the wretch who cast
O'er him and all he loved that ruinous blast.
For this, when rumors reached him in his flight
Far, far away, after that fatal night,--
Rumors of armies thronging to the attack
Of the Veiled Chief,--for this he winged him back,
Fleet as the Vulture speeds to flags unfurled,
And when all hope seemed desperate, wildly hurled
Himself into the scale and saved a world.
For this he still lives on, careless of all
The wreaths that Glory on his path lets fall;
For this alone exists--like lightning-fire,
To speed one bolt of vengeance and expire!

But safe as yet that Spirit of Evil lives;
With a small band of desperate fugitives,
The last sole stubborn fragment left unriven
Of the proud host that late stood fronting Heaven,
He gained MEROU--breathed a short curse of blood
O'er his lost throne--then past the JIHON'S flood,[114]
And gathering all whose madness of belief
Still saw a Saviour in their down-fallen Chief,
Raised the white banner within NEKSHEB'S gates,[115]
And there, untamed, the approaching conqueror waits.

Of all his Haram, all that busy hive,
With music and with sweets sparkling alive,
He took but one, the partner of his flight,
One--not for love--not for her beauty's light--
No, ZELICA stood withering midst the gay.
Wan as the blossom that fell yesterday
From the Alma tree and dies, while overhead
To-day's young flower is springing in its stead.[116]
Oh, not for love--the deepest Damned must be
Touched with Heaven's glory ere such fiends as he
Can feel one glimpse of Love's divinity.
But no, she is his victim; _there_ lie all
Her charms for him-charms that can never pall,
As long as hell within his heart can stir,
Or one faint trace of Heaven is left in her.
To work an angel's ruin,--to behold
As white a page as Virtue e'er unrolled
Blacken beneath his touch into a scroll
Of damning sins, sealed with a burning soul--
This is his triumph; this the joy accurst,
That ranks him among demons all but first:
This gives the victim that before him lies
Blighted and lost, a glory in his eyes,
A light like that with which hellfire illumes
The ghastly, writhing wretch whom it consumes!

But other tasks now wait him--tasks that need
All the deep daringness of thought and deed
With which the Divs have gifted him--for mark,[117]
Over yon plains which night had else made dark,
Those lanterns countless as the winged lights
That spangle INDIA'S field on showery nights,--[118]
Far as their formidable gleams they shed,
The mighty tents of the beleaguerer spread,
Glimmering along the horizon's dusky line
And thence in nearer circles till they shine
Among the founts and groves o'er which the town
In all its armed magnificence looks down.
Yet, fearless, from his lofty battlements
MOKANNA views that multitude of tents;
Nay, smiles to think that, tho' entoiled, beset,
Not less than myriads dare to front him yet;--
That friendless, throneless, he thus stands at bay,
Even thus a match for myriads such as they.
"Oh, for a sweep of that dark Angel's wing,
"Who brushed the thousands of the Assyrian King[119]
"To darkness in a moment that I might
"People Hell's chambers with yon host to-night!
"But come what may, let who will grasp the throne,
"Caliph or Prophet, Man alike shall groan;
"Let who will torture him, Priest--Caliph--King--
"Alike this loathsome world of his shall ring
"With victims' shrieks and howlings of the slave,--
"Sounds that shall glad me even within my grave!"
Thus, to himself--but to the scanty train
Still left around him, a far different strain:--
"Glorious Defenders of the sacred Crown
"I bear from Heaven whose light nor blood shall drown
"Nor shadow of earth eclipse;--before whose gems
"The paly pomp of this world's diadems,
"The crown of GERASHID. the pillared throne
"Of PARVIZ[120] and the heron crest that shone[121]
"Magnificent o'er ALI'S beauteous eyes.[122]
"Fade like the stars when morn is in the skies:
"Warriors, rejoice--the port to which we've past
"O'er Destiny's dark wave beams out at last!
"Victory's our own--'tis written in that Book
"Upon whose leaves none but the angels look,
"That ISLAM'S sceptre shall beneath the power
"Of her great foe fall broken in that hour
"When the moon's mighty orb before all eyes
"From NEKSHEB'S Holy Well portentously shall rise!
"Now turn and see!"--They turned, and, as he spoke,
A sudden splendor all around them broke,
And they beheld an orb, ample and bright,
Rise from the Holy Well and cast its light[123]
Round the rich city and the plain for miles,--
Flinging such radiance o'er the gilded tiles
Of many a dome and fair-roofed imaret
As autumn suns shed round them when they set.
Instant from all who saw the illusive sign
A murmur broke--"Miraculous! divine!"
The Gheber bowed, thinking his idol star
Had waked, and burst impatient thro' the bar
Of midnight to inflame him to the war;
While he of MOUSSA'S creed saw in that ray
The glorious Light which in his freedom's day
Had rested on the Ark, and now again[124]
Shone out to bless the breaking of his chain.

"To victory!" is at once the cry of all--
Nor stands MOKANNA loitering at that call;
But instant the huge gates are flung aside,
And forth like a diminutive mountain-tide
Into the boundless sea they speed their course
Right on into the MOSLEM'S mighty force.
The watchmen of the camp,--who in their rounds
Had paused and even forgot the punctual sounds
Of the small drum with which they count the night,[125]
To gaze upon that supernatural light,--
Now sink beneath an unexpected arm,
And in a death-groan give their last alarm.
"On for the lamps that light yon lofty screen[126]
"Nor blunt your blades with massacre so mean;
"_There_ rests the CALIPH--speed--one lucky lance
"May now achieve mankind's deliverance."
Desperate the die--such as they only cast
Who venture for a world and stake their last.
But Fate's no longer with him--blade for blade
Springs up to meet them thro' the glimmering shade,
And as the clash is heard new legions soon
Pour to the spot, like bees of KAUZEROON[127]
To the shrill timbrel's summons,--till at length
The mighty camp swarms out in all its strength.
And back to NEKSHEB'S gates covering the plain
With random slaughter drives the adventurous train;
Among the last of whom the Silver Veil
Is seen glittering at times, like the white sail
Of some tost vessel on a stormy night
Catching the tempest's momentary light!

And hath not this brought the proud spirit low!
Nor dashed his brow nor checkt his daring? No.
Tho' half the wretches whom at night he led
To thrones and victory lie disgraced and dead,
Yet morning hears him with unshrinking crest.
Still vaunt of thrones and victory to the rest;--
And they believe him!--oh, the lover may
Distrust that look which steals his soul away;--
The babe may cease to think that it can play
With Heaven's rainbow;--alchymists may doubt
The shining gold their crucible gives out;
But Faith, fanatic Faith, once wedded fast
To some dear falsehood hugs it to the last.

And well the Impostor knew all lures and arts,
That LUCIFER e'er taught to tangle hearts;
Nor, mid these last bold workings of his plot
Against men's souls, is ZELICA forgot.
Ill-fated ZELICA! had reason been
Awake, thro' half the horrors thou hast seen,
Thou never couldst have borne it--Death had come
At once and taken thy wrung spirit home.
But 'twas not so--a torpor, a suspense
Of thought, almost of life, came o'er the intense
And passionate struggles of that fearful night,
When her last hope of peace and heaven took flight:
And tho' at times a gleam of frenzy broke,--
As thro' some dull volcano's veil of smoke
Ominous flashings now and then will start,
Which show the fire's still busy at its heart;
Yet was she mostly wrapt in solemn gloom,--
Not such as AZIM'S, brooding o'er its doom
And calm without as is the brow of death
While busy worms are gnawing underneath--
But in a blank and pulseless torpor free
From thought or pain, a sealed-up apathy
Which left her oft with scarce one living thrill
The cold, pale victim of her torturer's will.

Again, as in MEROU, he had her deckt
Gorgeously out, the Priestess of the sect;
And led her glittering forth before the eyes
Of his rude train as to a sacrifice,--
Pallid as she, the young, devoted Bride
Of the fierce NILE, when, deckt in all the pride
Of nuptial pomp, she sinks into his tide.[128]
And while the wretched maid hung down her head,
And stood as one just risen from the dead
Amid that gazing crowd, the fiend would tell
His credulous slaves it was some charm or spell
Possest her now,--and from that darkened trance
Should dawn ere long their Faith's deliverance.
Or if at times goaded by guilty shame,
Her soul was roused and words of wildness came,
Instant the bold blasphemer would translate
Her ravings into oracles of fate,
Would hail Heaven's signals in her flashing eyes
And call her shrieks the language of the skies!

But vain at length his arts--despair is seen
Gathering around; and famine comes to glean
All that the sword had left unreaped;--in vain
At morn and eve across the northern plain
He looks impatient for the promised spears
Of the wild Hordes and TARTAR mountaineers;
They come not--while his fierce beleaguerers pour
Engines of havoc in, unknown before,[129]
And horrible as new;--javelins, that fly[130]
Enwreathed with smoky flames thro' the dark sky,
And red-hot globes that opening as they mount
Discharge as from a kindled Naphtha fount[131]
Showers of consuming fire o'er all below;
Looking as thro' the illumined night they go
Like those wild birds that by the Magians oft[132]
At festivals of fire were sent aloft
Into the air with blazing fagots tied
To their huge wings, scattering combustion wide.
All night the groans of wretches who expire
In agony beneath these darts of fire
Ring thro' the city--while descending o'er
Its shrines and domes and streets of sycamore,--
Its lone bazars, with their bright cloths of gold,
Since the last peaceful pageant left unrolled,--
Its beauteous marble baths whose idle jets.
Now gush with blood,--and its tall minarets
That late have stood up in the evening glare
Of the red sun, unhallowed by a prayer;--
O'er each in turn the dreadful flame-bolts fall,
And death and conflagration throughout all
The desolate city hold high festival!

MOKANNA sees the world is his no more;--
One sting at parting and his grasp is o'er,
"What! drooping now?"--thus, with unblushing cheek,
He hails the few who yet can hear him speak,
Of all those famished slaves around him lying,
And by the light of blazing temples dying;
"What!--drooping now!--now, when at length we press
"Home o'er the very threshold of success;
"When ALLA from our ranks hath thinned away
"Those grosser branches that kept out his ray
"Of favor from us and we stand at length
"Heirs of his light and children of his strength,
"The chosen few who shall survive the fall
"Of Kings and Thrones, triumphant over all!
"Have you then lost, weak murmurers as you are,
"All faith in him who was your Light, your Star?
"Have you forgot the eye of glory hid
"Beneath this Veil, the flashing of whose lid
"Could like a sun-stroke of the desert wither
"Millions of such as yonder Chief brings hither?
"Long have its lightnings slept--too long--but now
"All earth shall feel the unveiling of this brow!
"To-night--yes, sainted men! this very night,
"I bid you all to a fair festal rite,
"Where--having deep refreshed each weary limb
"With viands such as feast Heaven's cherubim
"And kindled up your souls now sunk and dim
"With that pure wine the Dark-eyed Maids above
"Keep, sealed with precious musk, for those they love,--[133]
"I will myself uncurtain in your sight
"The wonders of this brow's ineffable light;
"Then lead you forth and with a wink disperse
"Yon myriads howling thro' the universe!"

Eager they listen--while each accent darts
New life into their chilled and hope-sick hearts;
Such treacherous life as the cool draught supplies
To him upon the stake who drinks and dies!
Wildly they point their lances to the light
Of the fast sinking sun, and shout "To-night!"--
"To-night," their Chief re-echoes in a voice
Of fiend-like mockery that bids hell rejoice.
Deluded victims!--never hath this earth
Seen mourning half so mournful as their mirth.
_Here_, to the few whose iron frames had stood
This racking waste of famine and of blood,
Faint, dying wretches clung, from whom the shout
Of triumph like a maniac's laugh broke out:--
_There_, others, lighted by the smouldering fire,
Danced like wan ghosts about a funeral pyre
Among the dead and dying strewed around;--
While some pale wretch lookt on and from his wound
Plucking the fiery dart by which he bled,
In ghastly transport waved it o'er his head!

'Twas more than midnight now--a fearful pause
Had followed the long shouts, the wild applause,
That lately from those Royal Gardens burst,
Where the veiled demon held his feast accurst,
When ZELICA, alas, poor ruined heart,
In every horror doomed to bear its part!--
Was bidden to the banquet by a slave,
Who, while his quivering lip the summons gave,
Grew black, as tho' the shadows of the grave
Compast him round and ere he could repeat
His message thro', fell lifeless at her feet!
Shuddering she went--a soul-felt pang of fear
A presage that her own dark doom was near,
Roused every feeling and brought Reason back
Once more to writhe her last upon the rack.
All round seemed tranquil even the foe had ceased
As if aware of that demoniac feast
His fiery bolts; and tho' the heavens looked red,
'Twas but some distant conflagration's spread.
But hark--she stops--she listens--dreadful tone!
'Tis her Tormentor's laugh--and now, a groan,
A long death-groan comes with it--can this be
The place of mirth, the bower of revelry?

She enters--Holy ALLA, what a sight
Was there before her! By the glimmering light
Of the pale dawn, mixt with the flare of brands
That round lay burning dropt from lifeless hands,
She saw the board in splendid mockery spread,
Rich censers breathing--garlands overhead--
The urns, the cups, from which they late had quaft
All gold and gems, but--what had been the draught?
Oh! who need ask that saw those livid guests,
With their swollen heads sunk blackening on their breasts,
Or looking pale to Heaven with glassy glare,
As if they sought but saw no mercy there;
As if they felt, tho' poison racked them thro',
Remorse the deadlier torment of the two!
While some, the bravest, hardiest in the train
Of their false Chief, who on the battle-plain
Would have met death with transport by his side,
Here mute and helpless gasped;--but as they died
Lookt horrible vengeance with their eyes' last strain,
And clenched the slackening hand at him in vain.

Dreadful it was to see the ghastly stare,
The stony look of horror and despair,
Which some of these expiring victims cast
Upon their souls' tormentor to the last;
Upon that mocking Fiend whose Veil now raised,
Showed them as in death's agony they gazed,
Not the long promised light, the brow whose beaming
Was to come forth, all conquering, all redeeming,
But features horribler than Hell e'er traced
On its own brood;--no Demon of the Waste,[134]
No church-yard Ghoul caught lingering in the light
Of the blest sun, e'er blasted human sight
With lineaments so foul, so fierce as those
The Impostor now in grinning mockery shows:--
"There, ye wise Saints, behold your Light, your Star--
"Ye _would_ be dupes and victims and ye _are_.
"Is it enough? or must I, while a thrill
"Lives in your sapient bosoms, cheat you still?
"Swear that the burning death ye feel within
"Is but the trance with which Heaven's joys begin:
"That this foul visage, foul as e'er disgraced
"Even monstrous men, is--after God's own taste;
"And that--but see!--ere I have half-way said
"My greetings thro', the uncourteous souls are fled.
"Farewell, sweet spirits! not in vain ye die,
"If EBLIS loves you half so well as I.--
"Ha, my young bride!--'tis well--take thou thy seat;
"Nay come--no shuddering--didst thou never meet
"The Dead before?--they graced our wedding, sweet;
"And these, my guests to-night, have brimmed so true
"Their parting cups, that _thou_ shalt pledge one too.
"But--how is this?--all empty? all drunk up?
"Hot lips have been before thee in the cup,
"Young bride,--yet stay--one precious drop remains,
"Enough to warm a gentle Priestess' veins;--
"Here, drink--and should thy lover's conquering arms
"Speed hither ere thy lip lose all its charms,
"Give him but half this venom in thy kiss,
"And I'll forgive my haughty rival's bliss!

"For, _me_--I too must die--but not like these
"Vile rankling things to fester in the breeze;
"To have this brow in ruffian triumph shown,
"With all death's grimness added to its own,
"And rot to dust beneath the taunting eyes
"Of slaves, exclaiming, 'There his Godship lies!'
"No--cursed race--since first my soul drew breath,
"They've been my dupes and _shall_ be even in death.
"Thou seest yon cistern in the shade--'tis filled
"With burning drugs for this last hour distilled;
"There will I plunge me, in that liquid flame--
"Fit bath to lave a dying Prophet's frame!--
"There perish, all--ere pulse of thine shall fail--
"Nor leave one limb to tell mankind the tale.
"So shall my votaries, wheresoe'er they rave,
"Proclaim that Heaven took back the Saint it gave;--
"That I've but vanished from this earth awhile,
"To come again with bright, unshrouded smile!
"So shall they build me altars in their zeal,
"Where knaves shall minister and fools shall kneel;
"Where Faith may mutter o'er her mystic spell,
"Written in blood--and Bigotry may swell
"The sail he spreads for Heaven with blasts from hell!
"So shall my banner thro' long ages be
"The rallying sign of fraud and anarchy;--
"Kings yet unborn shall rue MOKANNA'S name,
"And tho' I die my spirit still the same
"Shall walk abroad in all the stormy strife,
"And guilt and blood that were its bliss in life.
"But hark! their battering engine shakes the wall--
"Why, _let_ it shake--thus I can brave them all.
"No trace of me shall greet them when they come,
"And I can trust thy faith, for--thou'lt be dumb.
"Now mark how readily a wretch like me
"In one bold plunge commences Deity!"

He sprung and sunk as the last words were said--
Quick closed the burning waters o'er his head,
And ZELICA was left--within the ring
Of those wide walls the only living thing;
The only wretched one still curst with breath
In all that frightful wilderness of death!
More like some bloodless ghost--such as they tell,
In the Lone Cities of the Silent dwell,[135]
And there unseen of all but ALLA sit
Each by its own pale carcass watching it.
But morn is up and a fresh warfare stirs
Throughout the camp of the beleaguerers.
Their globes of fire (the dread artillery lent
By GREECE to conquering MAHADI) are spent;
And now the scorpion's shaft, the quarry sent
From high balistas and the shielded throng
Of soldiers swinging the huge ram along,
All speak the impatient Islamite's intent
To try, at length, if tower and battlement
And bastioned wall be not less hard to win,
Less tough to break down than the hearts within.
First he, in impatience and in toil is
The burning AZIM--oh! could he but see
The impostor once alive within his grasp,
Not the gaunt lion's hug nor boa's clasp
Could match thy gripe of vengeance or keep pace
With the fell heartiness of Hate's embrace!

Loud rings the ponderous ram against the walls;
Now shake the ramparts, now a buttress falls,
But, still no breach--"Once more one mighty swing
"Of all your beams, together thundering!"
There--the wall shakes--the shouting troops exult,
"Quick, quick discharge your weightiest catapult
"Right on that spot and NEKSHEB is our own!"
'Tis done--the battlements come crashing down,
And the huge wall by that stroke riven in two
Yawning like some old crater rent anew,
Shows the dim, desolate city smoking thro'.
But strange! no sign of life--naught living seen
Above, below--what can this stillness mean?
A minute's pause suspends all hearts and eyes--
"In thro' the breach," impetuous AZIM cries;
But the cool CALIPH fearful of some wile
In this blank stillness checks the troops awhile.--
Just then a figure with slow step advanced
Forth from the ruined walls and as there glanced
A sunbeam over it all eyes could see
The well-known Silver Veil!--"'Tis He, 'tis He,
"MOKANNA and alone!" they shout around;
Young AZIM from his steed springs to the ground--
"Mine, Holy Caliph! mine," he cries, "the task
"To crush yon daring wretch--'tis all I ask."
Eager he darts to meet the demon foe
Who still across wide heaps of ruin slow
And falteringly comes, till they are near;
Then with a bound rushes on AZIM'S spear,
And casting off the Veil in falling shows--
Oh!--'tis his ZELICA'S life-blood that flows!

"I meant not, AZIM," soothingly she said,
As on his trembling arm she leaned her head,
And looking in his face saw anguish there
Beyond all wounds the quivering flesh can bear--
"I meant not _thou_ shouldst have the pain of this:--
"Tho' death with thee thus tasted is a bliss
"Thou wouldst not rob me of, didst thou but know
"How oft I've prayed to God I might die so!
"But the Fiend's venom was too scant and slow;--
"To linger on were maddening--and I thought
"If once that Veil--nay, look not on it--caught
"The eyes of your fierce soldiery, I should be
"Struck by a thousand death-darts instantly.
"But this is sweeter--oh! believe me, yes--
"I would not change this sad, but dear caress.
"This death within thy arms I would not give
"For the most smiling life the happiest live!
"All that stood dark and drear before the eye
"Of my strayed soul is passing swiftly by;
"A light comes o'er me from those looks of love,
"Like the first dawn of mercy from above;
"And if thy lips but tell me I'm forgiven,
"Angels will echo the blest words in Heaven!
"But live, my AZIM;--oh! to call thee mine
"Thus once again! _my_ AZIM--dream divine!
"Live, if thou ever lovedst me, if to meet
"Thy ZELICA hereafter would be sweet,
"Oh, live to pray for her--to bend the knee
"Morning and night before that Deity
"To whom pure lips and hearts without a stain,
"As thine are, AZIM, never breathed in vain,--
"And pray that He may pardon her,--may take
"Compassion on her soul for thy dear sake,
"And naught remembering but her love to thee,
"Make her all thine, all His, eternally!
"Go to those happy fields where first we twined
"Our youthful hearts together--every wind
"That meets thee there fresh from the well-known flowers
"Will bring the sweetness of those innocent hours
"Back to thy soul and thou mayst feel again
"For thy poor ZELICA as thou didst then.
"So shall thy orisons like dew that flies
"To Heaven upon the morning's sunshine rise
"With all love's earliest ardor to the skies!
"And should they--but, alas, my senses fail--
"Oh for one minute!--should thy prayers prevail--
"If pardoned souls may from that World of Bliss
"Reveal their joy to those they love in this--
"I'll come to thee--in some sweet dream--and tell--
"Oh Heaven--I die--dear love! farewell, farewell."

Time fleeted--years on years had past away,
And few of those who on that mournful day
Had stood with pity in their eyes to see
The maiden's death and the youth's agony,
Were living still--when, by a rustic grave,
Beside the swift Amoo's transparent wave,
An aged man who had grown aged there
By that lone grave, morning and night in prayer,
For the last time knelt down--and tho' the shade
Of death hung darkening over him there played
A gleam of rapture on his eye and cheek,
That brightened even Death--like the last streak
Of intense glory on the horizon's brim,
When night o'er all the rest hangs chill and dim.
His soul had seen a Vision while he slept;
She for whose spirit he had prayed and wept
So many years had come to him all drest
In angel smiles and told him she was blest!
For this the old man breathed his thanks and died.--
And there upon the banks of that loved tide,
He and his ZELICA sleep side by side.


The story of the Veiled Prophet of Khorassan being ended, they were now
doomed to hear FADLADEEN'S criticisms upon it. A series of disappointments
and accidents had occurred to this learned Chamberlain during the journey.
In the first place, those couriers stationed, as in the reign of Shah
Jehan, between Delhi and the Western coast of India, to secure a constant
supply of mangoes for the Royal Table, had by some cruel irregularity
failed in their duty; and to eat any mangoes but those of Mazagong was of
course impossible.[136] In the next place, the elephant laden with his
fine antique porcelain,[137] had, in an unusual fit of liveliness,
shattered the whole set to pieces:--an irreparable loss, as many of the
vessels were so exquisitely old, as to have been used under the Emperors
Yan and Chun, who reigned many ages before the dynasty of Tang. His Koran
too, supposed to be the identical copy between the leaves of which
Mahomet's favorite pigeon used to nestle, had been mislaid by his
Koran-bearer three whole days; not without much spiritual alarm to
FADLADEEN who though professing to hold with other loyal and orthodox
Mussulmans that salvation could only be found in the Koran was strongly
suspected of believing in his heart that it could only be found in his own
particular copy of it. When to all these grievances is added the obstinacy
of the cooks in putting the pepper of Canara into his dishes instead of
the cinnamon of Serendib, we may easily suppose that he came to the task
of criticism with at least a sufficient degree of irritability for the
purpose.

"In order," said he, importantly swinging about his chaplet of pearls, "to
convey with clearness my opinion of the story this young man has related,
it is necessary to take a review of all the stories that have ever"---"My
good FADLADEEN!" exclaimed the Princess, interrupting him, "we really do
not deserve that you should give yourself so much trouble. Your opinion of
the poem we have just heard, will I have no doubt be abundantly edifying
without any further waste of your valuable erudition."--"If that be all,"
replied the critic,--evidently mortified at not being allowed to show how
much he knew about everything but the subject immediately before him--"if
that be all that is required the matter is easily despatched." He then
proceeded to analyze the poem, in that strain (so well known to the
unfortunate bards of Delhi), whose censures were an infliction from which
few recovered and whose very praises were like the honey extracted from
the bitter flowers of the aloe. The chief personages of the story were, if
he rightly understood them, an ill-favored gentleman with a veil over his
face;--a young lady whose reason went and came according as it suited the
poet's convenience to be sensible or otherwise;--and a youth in one of
those hideous Bokharian bonnets, who took the aforesaid gentleman in a
veil for a Divinity. "From such materials," said he, "what can be
expected?--after rivalling each other in long speeches and absurdities
through some thousands of lines as indigestible as the filberts of Berdaa,
our friend in the veil jumps into a tub of aquafortis; the young lady dies
in a set speech whose only recommendation is that it is her last; and the
lover lives on to a good old age for the laudable purpose of seeing her
ghost which he at last happily accomplishes, and expires. This you will
allow is a fair summary of the story; and if Nasser, the Arabian merchant,
told no better, our Holy Prophet (to whom be all honor and glory!) had no
need to be jealous of his abilities for story-telling."

With respect to the style, it was worthy of the matter;--it had not even
those politic contrivances of structure which make up for the commonness
of the thoughts by the peculiarity of the manner nor that stately poetical
phraseology by which sentiments mean in themselves, like the blacksmith's
[138] apron converted into a banner, are so easily gilt and embroidered
into consequence. Then as to the versification it was, to say no worse of
it, execrable: it had neither the copious flow of Ferdosi, the sweetness
of Hafez, nor the sententious march of Sadi; but appeared to him in the
uneasy heaviness of its movements to have been modelled upon the gait of a
very tired dromedary. The licenses too in which it indulged were
unpardonable;--for instance this line, and the poem abounded with such;--

  Like the faint, exquisite music of a dream.

"What critic that can count," said FADLADEEN, "and has his full complement
of fingers to count withal, would tolerate for an instant such syllabic
superfluities?"--He here looked round, and discovered that most of his
audience were asleep; while the glimmering lamps seemed inclined to follow
their example. It became necessary therefore, however painful to himself,
to put an end to his valuable animadversions for the present and he
accordingly concluded with an air of dignified candor, thus:--

"Notwithstanding the observations which I have thought it my duty to make,
it is by no means my wish to discourage the young man:--so far from it
indeed that if he will but totally alter his style of writing and thinking
I have very little doubt that I shall be vastly pleased with him."

Some days elapsed after this harangue of the Great Chamberlain before
LALLA ROOKH could venture to ask for another story. The youth was still a
welcome guest in the pavilion--to _one_ heart perhaps too dangerously
welcome;--but all mention of poetry was as if by common consent avoided.
Though none of the party had much respect for FADLADEEN, yet his censures
thus magisterially delivered evidently made an impression on them all. The
Poet himself to whom criticism was quite a new operation, (being wholly
unknown in that Paradise of the Indies, Cashmere,) felt the shock as it is
generally felt at first, till use has made it more tolerable to the
patient;--the Ladies began to suspect that they ought not to be pleased
and seemed to conclude that there must have been much good sense in what
FADLADEEN said from its having set them all so soundly to sleep;--while
the self-complacent Chamberlain was left to triumph in the idea of having
for the hundred and fiftieth time in his life extinguished a Poet. LALLA
ROOKH alone--and Love knew why--persisted in being delighted with all she
had heard and in resolving to hear more as speedily as possible. Her
manner however of first returning to the subject was unlucky. It was while
they rested during the heat of noon near a fountain on which some hand had
rudely traced those well-known words from the Garden of Sadi.--"Many like
me have viewed this fountain, but they are gone and their eyes are closed
for ever!"--that she took occasion from the melancholy beauty of this
passage to dwell upon the charms of poetry in general. "It is true," she
said, "few poets can imitate that sublime bird which flies always in the
air and never touches the earth:[139]--it is only once in many ages a
Genius appears whose words, like those on the Written Mountain last for
ever:[140]--but still there are some as delightful perhaps, though not so
wonderful, who if not stars over our head are at least flowers along our
path and whose sweetness of the moment we ought gratefully to inhale
without calling upon them for a brightness and a durability beyond their
nature. In short," continued she, blushing as if conscious of being caught
in an oration, "it is quite cruel that a poet cannot wander through his
regions of enchantment without having a critic for ever, like the old Man
of the Sea, upon his back!"[141]--FADLADEEN, it was plain took this last
luckless allusion to himself and would treasure it up in his mind as a
whetstone for his next criticism. A sudden silence ensued; and the
Princess, glancing a look at FERAMORZ, saw plainly she must wait for a
more courageous moment.

But the glories of Nature and her wild, fragrant airs playing freshly over
the current of youthful spirits will soon heal even deeper wounds than the
dull Fadladeens of this world can inflict. In an evening or two after,
they came to the small Valley of Gardens which had been planted by order
of the Emperor for his favorite sister Rochinara during their progress to
Cashmere some years before; and never was there a more sparkling
assemblage of sweets since the Gulzar-e-Irem or Rose-bower of Irem. Every
precious flower was there to be found that poetry or love or religion has
ever consecrated; from the dark hyacinth to which Hafez compares his
mistress's hair to be _Cmalat_ by whose rosy blossoms the heaven of
Indra is scented.[142] As they sat in the cool fragrance of this
delicious spot and LALLA ROOKH remarked that she could fancy it the abode
of that flower-loving Nymph whom they worship in the temples of Kathay,
[143] or of one of those Peris, those beautiful creatures of the air who
live upon perfumes and to whom a place like this might make some amends
for the Paradise they have lost,--the young Poet in whose eyes she
appeared while she spoke to be one of the bright spiritual creatures she
was describing said hesitatingly that he remembered a Story of a Peri,
which if the Princess had no objection he would venture to relate. "It
is," said he, with an appealing look to FADLADEEN, "in a lighter and
humbler strain than the other:" then, striking a few careless but
melancholy chords on his kitar, he thus began:--


PARADISE AND THE PERI.


One morn a Peri at the gate
Of Eden stood disconsolate;
And as she listened to the Springs
  Of Life within like music flowing
And caught the light upon her wings
  Thro' the half-open portal glowing,
She wept to think her recreant race
Should e'er have lost that glorious place!

"How happy," exclaimed this child of air,
"Are the holy Spirits who wander there
  "Mid flowers that never shall fade or fall;
"Tho' mine are the gardens of earth and sea
"And the stars themselves have flowers for me,
  "One blossom of Heaven out-blooms them all!

"Tho' sunny the Lake of cool CASHMERE
"With its plane-tree Isle reflected clear,[144]
  "And sweetly the founts of that Valley fall;
"Tho' bright are the waters of SING-SU-HAY
And the golden floods that thitherward stray,[145]
Yet--oh, 'tis only the Blest can say
  How the waters of Heaven outshine them all!

"Go, wing thy flight from star to star,
From world to luminous world as far
  As the universe spreads its flaming wall:
Take all the pleasures of all the spheres
And multiply each thro' endless years
  One minute of Heaven is worth them all!"

The glorious Angel who was keeping
The gates of Light beheld her weeping,
And as he nearer drew and listened
To her sad song, a tear-drop glistened
Within his eyelids, like the spray
  From Eden's fountain when it lies
On the blue flower which--Bramins say--
  Blooms nowhere but in Paradise.[146]

"Nymph of a fair but erring line!"
Gently he said--"One hope is thine.
'Tis written in the Book of Fate,
  _The Peri yet may be forgiven
Who brings to this Eternal gate
  The Gift that is most dear to Heaven_!
Go seek it and redeem thy sin--
'Tis sweet to let the Pardoned in."

Rapidly as comets run
To the embraces of the Sun;--
Fleeter than the starry brands
Flung at night from angel hands[147]
At those dark and daring sprites
Who would climb the empyreal heights,
Down the blue vault the PERI flies,
  And lighted earthward by a glance
That just then broke from morning's eyes,
  Hung hovering o'er our world's expanse.

But whither shall the Spirit go
To find this gift for Heaven;--"I know
The wealth," she cries, "of every urn
In which unnumbered rubies burn
Beneath the pillars of CHILMINAR:[148]
I know where the Isles of Perfume are[149]
Many a fathom down in the sea,
To the south of sun-bright ARABY;[150]
I know too where the Genii hid
The jewelled cup of their King JAMSHID,[151]
"With Life's elixir sparkling high--
"But gifts like these are not for the sky.
"Where was there ever a gem that shone
"Like the steps of ALLA'S wonderful Throne?
"And the Drops of Life--oh! what would they be
"In the boundless Deep of Eternity?"

While thus she mused her pinions fanned
The air of that sweet Indian land
Whose air is balm, whose ocean spreads
O'er coral rocks and amber beds,[152]
Whose mountains pregnant by the beam
Of the warm sun with diamonds teem,
Whose rivulets are like rich brides,
Lovely, with gold beneath their tides,
Whose sandal groves and bowers of spice
Might be a Peri's Paradise!
But crimson now her rivers ran
  With human blood--the smell of death
Came reeking from those spicy bowers,
And man the sacrifice of man
  Mingled his taint with every breath
Upwafted from the innocent flowers.
Land of the Sun! what foot invades
Thy Pagods and thy pillared shades--
Thy cavern shrines and Idol stones,
Thy Monarch and their thousand Thrones?[153]

'Tis He of GAZNA[154], fierce in wrath
  He comes and INDIA'S diadems
Lie scattered in his ruinous path.-
  His bloodhounds he adorns with gems,
Torn from the violated necks
  Of many a young and loved Sultana;[155]
  Maidens within their pure Zenana,
  Priests in the very fane he slaughters,
And chokes up with the glittering wrecks
  Of golden shrines the sacred waters!
Downward the PERI turns her gaze,
And thro' the war-field's bloody haze
Beholds a youthful warrior stand
Alone beside his native river,--
The red blade broken in his hand
And the last arrow in his quiver.
"Live," said the Conqueror, "live to share
"The trophies and the crowns I bear!"
Silent that youthful warrior stood--
Silent he pointed to the flood
All crimson with his country's blood,
Then sent his last remaining dart,
For answer, to the Invader's heart.

False flew the shaft tho' pointed well;
The Tyrant lived, the Hero fell!--
Yet marked the PERI where he lay,
  And when the rush of war was past
Swiftly descending on a ray
  Of morning light she caught the last--
Last glorious drop his heart had shed
Before its free-born spirit fled!

"Be this," she cried, as she winged her flight,
"My welcome gift at the Gates of Light.
"Tho' foul are the drops that oft distil
  "On the field of warfare, blood like this
  "For Liberty shed so holy is,
"It would not stain the purest rill
  "That sparkles among the Bowers of Bliss!
"Oh, if there be on this earthly sphere
"A boon, an offering Heaven holds dear,
"'Tis the last libation Liberty draws
"From the heart that bleeds and breaks in her cause!"
"Sweet," said the Angel, as she gave
The gift into his radiant hand,
"Sweet is our welcome of the Brave
  "Who die thus for their native Land.--
"But see--alas! the crystal bar
"Of Eden moves not--holier far
"Than even this drop the boon must be
"That opes the Gates of Heaven for thee!"

Her first fond hope of Eden blighted,
  Now among AFRIC'S lunar Mountains[156]
Far to the South the PERI lighted
  And sleeked her plumage at the fountains
Of that Egyptian tide whose birth
Is hidden from the sons of earth
Deep in those solitary woods
Where oft the Genii of the Floods
Dance round the cradle of their Nile
And hail the new-born Giant's smile.[157]
Thence over EGYPT'S palmy groves
  Her grots, and sepulchres of Kings,[158]
The exiled Spirit sighing roves
And now hangs listening to the doves
In warm ROSETTA'S vale;[159] now loves
  To watch the moonlight on the wings
Of the white pelicans that break
The azure calm of MOERIS' Lake.[160]
'Twas a fair scene: a Land more bright
  Never did mortal eye behold!
Who could have thought that saw this night
  Those valleys and their fruits of gold
Basking in Heaven's serenest light,
Those groups of lovely date-trees bending
  Languidly their leaf-crowned heads,
Like youthful maids, when sleep descending
  Warns them to their silken beds,[161]
Those virgin lilies all the night
  Bathing their beauties in the lake
That they may rise more fresh and bright,
  When their beloved Sun's awake,
Those ruined shrines and towers that seem
The relics of a splendid dream,
  Amid whose fairy loneliness
Naught but the lapwing's cry is heard,--
Naught seen but (when the shadows flitting,
Fast from the moon unsheath its gleam,)
Some purple-winged Sultana sitting[162]
  Upon a column motionless
And glittering like an Idol bird!--
Who could have thought that there, even there,
Amid those scenes so still and fair,
The Demon of the Plague hath cast
From his hot wing a deadlier blast,
More mortal far than ever came
From the red Desert's sands of flame!
So quick that every living thing
Of human shape touched by his wing,
Like plants, where the Simoom hath past
At once falls black and withering!
The sun went down on many a brow
  Which, full of bloom and freshness then,
Is rankling in the pest-house now
  And ne'er will feel that sun again,
And, oh! to see the unburied heaps
On which the lonely moonlight sleeps--
The very vultures turn away,
And sicken at so foul a prey!
Only the fierce hyaena stalks[163]
Throughout the city's desolate walks[164]
At midnight and his carnage plies:--
  Woe to the half-dead wretch who meets
The glaring of those large blue eyes
  Amid the darkness of the streets!

"Poor race of men!" said the pitying Spirit,
  "Dearly ye pay for your primal Fall--
"Some flowerets of Eden ye still inherit,
  "But the trail of the Serpent is over them all!"
She wept--the air grew pure and clear
  Around her as the bright drops ran,
For there's a magic in each tear
  Such kindly Spirits weep for man!

Just then beneath some orange trees
Whose fruit and blossoms in the breeze
Were wantoning together, free,
Like age at play with infancy--
Beneath that fresh and springing bower
  Close by the Lake she heard the moan
Of one who at this silent hour,
  Had thither stolen to die alone.
One who in life where'er he moved,
  Drew after him the hearts of many;
Yet now, as tho' he ne'er were loved,
  Dies here unseen, unwept by any!
None to watch near him--none to slake
  The fire that in his bosom lies,
With even a sprinkle from that lake
  Which shines so cool before his eyes.
No voice well known thro' many a day
  To speak the last, the parting word
Which when all other sounds decay
  Is still like distant music heard;--
That tender farewell on the shore
Of this rude world when all is o'er,
Which cheers the spirit ere its bark
Puts off into the unknown Dark.

Deserted youth! one thought alone
  Shed joy around his soul in death
That she whom he for years had known,
And loved and might have called his own
  Was safe from this foul midnight's breath,--
Safe in her father's princely halls
Where the cool airs from fountain falls,
Freshly perfumed by many a brand
Of the sweet wood from India's land,
Were pure as she whose brow they fanned.

But see--who yonder comes by stealth,
  This melancholy bower to seek,
Like a young envoy sent by Health
  With rosy gifts upon her cheek?
'Tis she--far off, thro' moonlight dim
  He knew his own betrothed bride,
She who would rather die with him
  Than live to gain the world beside!--
Her arms are round her lover now,
  His livid cheek to hers she presses
And dips to bind his burning brow
  In the cool lake her loosened tresses.
Ah! once, how little did he think
An hour would come when he should shrink
With horror from that dear embrace,
  Those gentle arms that were to him
Holy as is the cradling place
  Of Eden's infant cherubim!
And now he yields--now turns away,
Shuddering as if the venom lay
All in those proffered lips alone--
Those lips that then so fearless grown
Never until that instant came
Near his unasked or without shame.
"Oh! let me only breathe the air.
"The blessed air, that's breathed by thee,
"And whether on its wings it bear
  "Healing or death 'tis sweet to me!
"There--drink my tears while yet they fall--
  "Would that my bosom's blood were balm,
"And, well thou knowst, I'd shed it all
  "To give thy brow one minute's calm.
"Nay, turn not from me that dear face--
  "Am I not thine--thy own loved bride--
"The one, the chosen one, whose place
  "In life or death is by thy side?
"Thinkst thou that she whose only light,
  "In this dim world from thee hath shone
"Could bear the long, the cheerless night
  "That must be hers when thou art gone?
"That I can live and let thee go,
"Who art my life itself?--No, no--
"When the stem dies the leaf that grew
"Out of its heart must perish too!
"Then turn to me, my own love, turn,
"Before, like thee, I fade and burn;
"Cling to these yet cool lips and share
"The last pure life that lingers there!"
She fails--she sinks--as dies the lamp
In charnel airs or cavern-damp,
So quickly do his baleful sighs
Quench all the sweet light of her eyes,
One struggle--and his pain is past--
  Her lover is no longer living!
One kiss the maiden gives, one last,
  Long kiss, which she expires in giving!

"Sleep," said the PERI, as softly she stole
The farewell sigh of that vanishing soul,
As true as e'er warmed a woman's breast--
"Sleep on, in visions of odor rest
"In balmier airs than ever yet stirred
"The enchanted pile of that lonely bird
"Who sings at the last his own death-lay[165]
"And in music and perfume dies away!"
Thus saying, from her lips she spread
  Unearthly breathings thro' the place
And shook her sparkling wreath and shed
  Such lustre o'er each paly face
That like two lovely saints they seemed,
  Upon the eve of doomsday taken
From their dim graves in ordor sleeping;
  While that benevolent PERI beamed
Like their good angel calmly keeping
  Watch o'er them till their souls would waken.

But morn is blushing in the sky;
  Again the PERI soars above,
Bearing to Heaven that precious sigh
  Of pure, self-sacrificing love.
High throbbed her heart with hope elate
  The Elysian palm she soon shall win.
For the bright Spirit at the gate
  Smiled as she gave that offering in;
And she already hears the trees
  Of Eden with their crystal bells
Ringing in that ambrosial breeze
  That from the throne of ALLA swells;
And she can see the starry bowls
  That lie around that lucid lake
Upon whose banks admitted Souls
  Their first sweet draught of glory take![166]

But, ah! even PERIS' hopes are vain--
Again the Fates forbade, again
The immortal barrier closed--"Not yet,"
The Angel said as with regret
He shut from her that glimpse of glory--
"True was the maiden, and her story
"Written in light o'er ALLA'S head
"By seraph eyes shall long be read.
"But, PERI, see--the crystal bar
"Of Eden moves not--holier far
"Than even this sigh the boon must be
"That opes the Gates of Heaven for thee."

  Now upon SYRIA'S land of roses[167]
Softly the light of Eve reposes,
And like a glory the broad sun
Hangs over sainted LEBANON,
Whose head in wintry grandeur towers
  And whitens with eternal sleet,
While summer in a vale of flowers
  Is sleeping rosy at his feet.

To one who looked from upper air
O'er all the enchanted regions there,
How beauteous must have been the glow,
The life, the sparkling from below!
Fair gardens, shining streams, with ranks
Of golden melons on their banks,
More golden where the sunlight falls;--
Gay lizards, glittering on the walls[168]
Of ruined shrines, busy and bright
As they were all alive with light;
And yet more splendid numerous flocks
Of pigeons settling on the rocks
With their rich restless wings that gleam
Variously in the crimson beam
Of the warm West,--as if inlaid
With brilliants from the mine or made
Of tearless rainbows such as span
The unclouded skies of PERISTAN.
And then the mingling sounds that come,
Of shepherd's ancient reed,[169] with hum
Of the wild bees of PALESTINE,[170]
  Banqueting thro' the flowery vales;
And, JORDAN, those sweet banks of thine
  And woods so full of nightingales.[171]
But naught can charm the luckless PERI;
Her soul is sad--her wings are weary--
Joyless she sees the Sun look down
On that great Temple once his own,[172]
Whose lonely columns stand sublime,
Flinging their shadows from on high
Like dials which the Wizard Time
Had raised to count his ages by!

Yet haply there may lie concealed
  Beneath those Chambers of the Sun
Some amulet of gems, annealed
In upper fires, some tablet sealed
  With the great name of SOLOMON,
  Which spelled by her illumined eyes,
May teach her where beneath the moon,
In earth or ocean, lies the boon,
The charm, that can restore so soon
  An erring Spirit to the skies.

Cheered by this hope she bends her thither;--
  Still laughs the radiant eye of Heaven,
  Nor have the golden bowers of Even
In the rich West begun to wither;--
When o'er the vale of BALBEC winging
  Slowly she sees a child at play,
Among the rosy wild flowers singing,
  As rosy and as wild as they;
Chasing with eager hands and eyes
The beautiful blue damsel-flies,[173]
That fluttered round the jasmine stems
Like winged flowers or flying gems:--
And near the boy, who tired with play
Now nestling mid the roses lay.
She saw a wearied man dismount
  From his hot steed and on the brink
Of a small imaret's rustic fount
  Impatient fling him down to drink.
Then swift his haggard brow he turned
  To the fair child who fearless sat,
Tho' never yet hath day-beam burned
  Upon a brow more fierce than that,--
Sullenly fierce--a mixture dire
Like thunder-clouds of gloom and fire;
In which the PERI'S eye could read
Dark tales of many a ruthless deed;
The ruined maid--the shrine profaned--
Oaths broken--and the threshold stained
With blood of guests!--_there_ written, all,
Black as the damning drops that fall
From the denouncing Angel's pen,
Ere Mercy weeps them out again.
Yet tranquil now that man of crime
(As if the balmy evening time
Softened his spirit) looked and lay,
Watching the rosy infant's play:--
Tho' still whene'er his eye by chance
Fell on the boy's, its lucid glance
  Met that unclouded, joyous gaze,
As torches that have burnt all night
Tho' some impure and godless rite,
  Encounter morning's glorious rays.

But, hark! the vesper call to prayer,
  As slow the orb of daylight sets,
Is rising sweetly on the air.
  From SYRIA'S thousand minarets!
The boy has started from the bed
Of flowers where he had laid his head.
And down upon the fragrant sod
  Kneels[174] with his forehead to the south
Lisping the eternal name of God
  From Purity's own cherub mouth,
And looking while his hands and eyes
Are lifted to the glowing skies
Like a stray babe of Paradise
Just lighted on that flowery plain
And seeking for its home again.
Oh! 'twas a sight--that Heaven--that child--
A scene, which might have well beguiled
Even haughty EBLIS of a sigh
For glories lost and peace gone by!
And how felt _he_, the wretched Man
Reclining there--while memory ran
O'er many a year of guilt and strife,
Flew o'er the dark flood of his life,
Nor found one sunny resting-place.
Nor brought him back one branch of grace.
"There _was_ a time," he said, in mild,
Heart-humbled tones--"thou blessed child!
"When young and haply pure as thou
"I looked and prayed like thee--but now"--
He hung his head--each nobler aim
  And hope and feeling which had slept
From boyhood's hour that instant came
  Fresh o'er him and he wept--he wept!

Blest tears of soul-felt penitence!
  In whose benign, redeeming flow
Is felt the first, the only sense
  Of guiltless joy that guilt can know.
"There's a drop," said the PERI, "that down from the moon
"Falls thro' the withering airs of June
"Upon EGYPT'S land,[175] of so healing a power,
"So balmy a virtue, that even in the hour
"That drop descends contagion dies
"And health reanimates earth and skies!--
"Oh, is it not thus, thou man of sin,
  "The precious tears of repentance fall?
"Tho' foul thy fiery plagues within
  "One heavenly drop hath dispelled them all!"
And now--behold him kneeling there
By the child's side, in humble prayer,
While the same sunbeam shines upon
The guilty and the guiltless one.
And hymns of joy proclaim thro' Heaven
The triumph of a Soul Forgiven!

'Twas when the golden orb had set,
While on their knees they lingered yet,
There fell a light more lovely far
Than ever came from sun or star,
Upon the tear that, warm and meek,
Dewed that repentant sinner's cheek.
To mortal eye this light might seem
A northern flash or meteor beam--
But well the enraptured PERI knew
'Twas a bright smile the Angel threw
From Heaven's gate to hail that tear
Her harbinger of glory near!

"Joy, joy for ever! my task is done--
"The Gates are past and Heaven is won!
"Oh! am I not happy? I am, I am--
  "To thee, sweet Eden! how dark and sad
"Are the diamond turrets of SHADUKIAM,[176]
  "And the fragrant bowers of AMBERABAD!

"Farewell ye odors of Earth that die
"Passing away like a lover's sigh;--
"My feast is now of the Tooba Tree[177]
"Whose scent is the breath of Eternity!

"Farewell, ye vanishing flowers that shone
  "In my fairy wreath so bright an' brief;--
"Oh! what are the brightest that e'er have blown
"To the lote-tree springing by ALLA'S throne[178]
  "Whose flowers have a soul in every leaf.
"Joy, joy for ever.--my task is done--
"The Gates are past and Heaven is won!"


"And this," said the Great Chamberlain, "is poetry! this flimsy
manufacture of the brain, which in comparison with the lofty and durable
monuments of genius is as the gold filigree-work of Zamara beside the
eternal architecture of Egypt!" After this gorgeous sentence, which, with
a few more of the same kind, FADLADEEN kept by him for rare and important
occasions, he proceeded to the anatomy of the short poem just recited. The
lax and easy kind of metre in which it was written ought to be denounced,
he said, as one of the leading causes of the alarming growth of poetry in
our times. If some check were not given to this lawless facility we should
soon be overrun by a race of bards as numerous and as shallow as the
hundred and twenty thousand Streams of Basra.[179] They who succeeded in
this style deserved chastisement for their very success;--as warriors have
been punished even after gaining a victory because they had taken the
liberty of gaining it in an irregular or unestablished manner. What then
was to be said to those who failed? to those who presumed as in the
present lamentable instance to imitate the licence and ease of the bolder
sons of song without any of that grace or vigor which gave a dignity even
to negligence;--who like them flung the jereed[180] carelessly, but not,
like them, to the mark;--"and who," said he, raising his voice to excite a
proper degree of wakefulness in his hearers, "contrive to appear heavy and
constrained in the midst of all the latitude they allow themselves, like
one of those young pagans that dance before the Princess, who is ingenious
enough to move as if her limbs were fettered, in a pair of the lightest
and loosest drawers of Masulipatam!"

It was but little suitable, he continued, to the grave march of criticism
to follow this fantastical Peri of whom they had just heard, through all
her flights and adventures between earth and heaven, but he could not help
adverting to the puerile conceitedness of the Three Gifts which she is
supposed to carry to the skies,--a drop of blood, forsooth, a sigh, and a
tear! How the first of these articles was delivered into the Angel's
"radiant hand" he professed himself at a loss to discover; and as to the
safe carriage of the sigh and the tear, such Peris and such poets were
beings by far too incomprehensible for him even to guess how they managed
such matters. "But, in short," said he, "it is a waste of time and
patience to dwell longer upon a thing so incurably frivolous,--puny even
among its own puny race, and such as only the Banyan Hospital[181] for
Sick Insects should undertake."

In vain did LALLA ROOKH try to soften this inexorable critic; in vain did
she resort to her most eloquent commonplaces, reminding him that poets
were a timid and sensitive race whose sweetness was not to be drawn forth
like that of the fragrant grass near the Ganges by crushing and trampling
upon them,[182] that severity often extinguished every chance of the
perfection which it demanded, and that after all perfection was like the
Mountain of the Talisman,--no one had ever yet reached its summit.[183]
Neither these gentle axioms nor the still gentler looks with which they
were inculcated could lower for one instant the elevation of FADLADEEN'S
eyebrows or charm him into anything like encouragement or even toleration
of her poet. Toleration, indeed, was not among the weaknesses of
FADLADEEN:--he carried the same spirit into matters of poetry and of
religion, and though little versed in the beauties or sublimities of
either was a perfect master of the art of persecution in both. His zeal
was the same too in either pursuit, whether the game before him was pagans
or poetasters, worshippers of cows, or writers of epics.

They had now arrived at the splendid city of Lahore whose mausoleums and
shrines, magnificent and numberless where Death appeared to share equal
honors with Heaven would have powerfully affected the heart and
imagination of LALLA ROOKH, if feelings more of this earth had not taken
entire possession of her already. She was here met by messengers
despatched from Cashmere who informed her that the King had arrived in the
Valley and was himself superintending the sumptuous preparations that were
then making in the Saloons of the Shalimar for her reception. The chill
she felt on receiving this intelligence,--which to a bride whose heart was
free and light would have brought only images of affection and
pleasure,--convinced her that her peace was gone for ever and that she was
in love, irretrievably in love, with young FERAMORZ. The veil had fallen
off in which this passion at first disguises itself, and to know that she
loved was now as painful as to love without knowing it had been delicious.
FERAMORZ, too,--what misery would be his, if the sweet hours of
intercourse so imprudently allowed them should have stolen into his heart
the same fatal fascination as into hers;--if, notwithstanding her rank and
the modest homage he always paid to it, even _he_ should have yielded to
the influence of those long and happy interviews where music, poetry, the
delightful scenes of nature,--all had tended to bring their hearts close
together and to waken by every means that too ready passion which often
like the young of the desert-bird is warmed into life by the eyes alone!
[184] She saw but one way to preserve herself from being culpable as well
as unhappy, and this however painful she was resolved to adopt. FERAMORZ
must no more be admitted to her presence. To have strayed so far into the
dangerous labyrinth was wrong, but to linger in it while the clew was yet
in her hand would be criminal. Though the heart she had to offer to the
King of Bucharia might be cold and broken, it should at least be pure, and
she must only endeavor to forget the short dream of happiness she had
enjoyed,--like that Arabian shepherd who in wandering into the wilderness
caught a glimpse of the Gardens of Irim and then lost them again for ever!

The arrival of the young Bride at Lahore was celebrated in the most
enthusiastic manner. The Rajas and Omras in her train, who had kept at a
certain distance during the journey and never encamped nearer to the
Princess than was strictly necessary for her safeguard here rode in
splendid cavalcade through the city and distributed the most costly
presents to the crowd. Engines were erected in all the squares which cast
forth showers of confectionery among the people, while the artisans in
chariots[185] adorned with tinsel and flying streamers exhibited the
badges of their respective trades through the streets. Such brilliant
displays of life and pageantry among the palaces and domes and gilded
minarets of Lahore made the city altogether like a place of
enchantment;--particularly on the day when LALLA ROOKH set out again upon
her journey, when she was accompanied to the gate by all the fairest and
richest of the nobility and rode along between ranks of beautiful boys and
girls who kept waving over their heads plates of gold and silver
flowers,[186] and then threw them around to be gathered by the populace.

For many days after their departure from Lahore a considerable degree of
gloom hung over the whole party. LALLA ROOKH, who had intended to make
illness her excuse for not admitting the young minstrel, as usual, to the
pavilion, soon found that to feign indisposition was unnecessary;--
FADLADEEN felt the loss of the good road they had hitherto travelled and
was very near cursing Jehan-Guire (of blessed memory!) for not having
continued his delectable alley of trees[187] a least as far as the
mountains of Cashmere;--while the Ladies who had nothing now to do all day
but to be fanned by peacocks' feathers and listen to FADLADEEN seemed
heartily weary of the life they led and in spite of all the Great
Chamberlain's criticisms were so tasteless as to wish for the poet again.
One evening as they were proceeding to their place of rest for the night
the Princess who for the freer enjoyment of the air had mounted her
favorite Arabian palfrey, in passing by a small grove heard the notes of a
lute from within its leaves and a voice which she but too well knew
singing the following words:--

  Tell me not of joys above,
    If that world can give no bliss,
  Truer, happier than the Love
    Which enslaves our souls in this.

  Tell me not of Houris' eyes;--
    Far from me their dangerous glow.
  If those looks that light the skies
    Wound like some that burn below.

  Who that feels what Love is here,
    All its falsehood--all its pain--
  Would, for even Elysium's sphere,
    Risk the fatal dream again?

  Who that midst a desert's heat
    Sees the waters fade away
  Would not rather die than meet
    Streams again as false as they?

The tone of melancholy defiance in which these words were uttered went to
LALLA ROOKH'S heart;--and as she reluctantly rode on she could not help
feeling it to be a sad but still sweet certainty that FERAMORZ was to the
full as enamored and miserable as herself.

The place where they encamped that evening was the first delightful spot
they had come to since they left Lahore. On one side of them was a grove
full of small Hindoo temples and planted with the most graceful trees of
the East, where the tamarind, the cassia, and the silken plantains of
Ceylon were mingled in rich contrast with the high fan-like foliage of the
Palmyra,--that favorite tree of the luxurious bird that lights up the
chambers of its nest with fire-flies.[188]. In the middle of the lawn
where the pavilion stood there was a tank surrounded by small mango-trees
on the clear cold waters of which floated multitudes of the beautiful red
lotus,[189] while at a distance stood the ruins of a strange and awful-
looking tower which seemed old enough to have been the temple of some
religion no longer known and which spoke the voice of desolation in the
midst of all that bloom and loveliness. This singular ruin excited the
wonder and conjectures of all. LALLA ROOKH guessed in vain, and the all-
pretending FADLADEEN who had never till this journey been beyond the
precincts of Delhi was proceeding most learnedly to show that he knew
nothing whatever about the matter, when one of the Ladies suggested that
perhaps FERAMORZ could satisfy their curiosity. They were now approaching
his native mountains and this tower might perhaps be a relic of some of
those dark superstitions which had prevailed in that country before the
light of Islam dawned upon it. The Chamberlain who usually preferred his
own ignorance to the best knowledge that any one else could give him was
by no means pleased with this officious reference, and the Princess too
was about to interpose a faint word of objection, but before either of
them could speak a slave was despatched for FERAMORZ, who in a very few
minutes made his appearance before them--looking so pale and unhappy in
LALLA ROOKH'S eyes that she repented already of her cruelty in having so
long excluded him.

That venerable tower he told them was the remains of an ancient Fire-
Temple, built by those Ghebers or Persians of the old religion, who many
hundred years since had fled hither from the Arab conquerors, preferring
liberty and their altars in a foreign land to the alternative of apostasy
or persecution in their own. It was impossible, he added, not to feel
interested in the many glorious but unsuccessful struggles which had been
made by these original natives of Persia to cast off the yoke of their
bigoted conquerors. Like their own Fire in the Burning Field at Bakou when
suppressed in one place they had but broken out with fresh flame in
another; and as a native of Cashmere, of that fair and Holy Valley which
had in the same manner become the prey of strangers[190] and seen her
ancient shrines and native princes swept away before the march of her
intolerant invaders he felt a sympathy, he owned, with the sufferings of
the persecuted Ghebers which every monument like this before them but
tended more powerfully to awaken.

It was the first time that FERAMORZ had ever ventured upon so much
_prose_ before FADLADEEN and it may easily be conceived what effect such
prose as this must have produced upon that most orthodox and most pagan-
hating personage. He sat for some minutes aghast, ejaculating only at
intervals, "Bigoted conquerors!--sympathy with Fire-worshippers!"[191]--
while FERAMORZ happy to take advantage of this almost speechless horror of
the Chamberlain proceeded to say that he knew a melancholy story connected
with the events of one of those struggles of the brave Fire-worshippers
against their Arab masters, which if the evening was not too far advanced
he should have much pleasure in being allowed to relate to the Princess.
It was impossible for LALLA ROOKH to refuse;--he had never before looked
half so animated, and when he spoke of the Holy Valley his eyes had
sparkled she thought like the talismanic characters on the scimitar of
Solomon. Her consent was therefore most readily granted; and while
FADLADEEN sat in unspeakable dismay, expecting treason and abomination in
every line, the poet thus began his story of the Fire-worshippers:


THE FIRE-WORSHIPPERS.


'Tis moonlight over OMAN'S SEA;[192]
  Her banks of pearl and palmy isles
Bask in the night-beam beauteously
  And her blue waters sleep in smiles.
'Tis moonlight in HARMOZIA'S[193] walls,
And through her EMIR'S porphyry halls
Where some hours since was heard the swell
Of trumpets and the clash of zel[194]
Bidding the bright-eyed sun farewell;--
The peaceful sun whom better suits
  The music of the bulbul's nest
Or the light touch of lovers' lutes
  To sing him to his golden rest.
All husht--there's not a breeze in motion;
The shore is silent as the ocean.
If zephyrs come, so light they come.
  Nor leaf is stirred nor wave is driven;--
The wind-tower on the EMIR'S dome[195]
  Can hardly win a breath from heaven.

Even he, that tyrant Arab, sleeps
Calm, while a nation round him weeps,
While curses load the air he breathes
And falchions from unnumbered sheaths
Are starting to avenge the shame
His race hath brought on IRAN'S[196]name.
Hard, heartless Chief, unmoved alike
Mid eyes that weep and swords that strike;
One of that saintly, murderous brood,
  To carnage and the Koran given,
Who think thro' unbelievers' blood
  Lies their directest path to heaven,--
One who will pause and kneel unshod
  In the warm blood his hand hath poured,
To mutter o'er some text of God
  Engraven on his reeking sword;[197]
Nay, who can coolly note the line,
The letter of those words divine,
To which his blade with searching art
Had sunk into its victim's heart!

Just ALLA! what must be thy look
  When such a wretch before thee stands
Unblushing, with thy Sacred Book,--
  Turning the leaves with bloodstained hands,
And wresting from its page sublime
His creed of lust and hate and crime;--
Even as those bees of TREBIZOND,
  Which from the sunniest flowers that glad
With their pure smile the gardens round,
  Draw venom forth that drives men mad.[198]
Never did fierce Arabia send
  A satrap forth more direly great;
Never was IRAN doomed to bend
  Beneath a yoke of deadlier weight.
Her throne had fallen--her pride was crusht--
Her sons were willing slaves, nor blusht,
In their own land,--no more their own,--
To crouch beneath a stranger's throne.
Her towers where MITHRA once had burned.
To Moslem shrines--oh shame!--were turned,
Where slaves converted by the sword,
Their mean, apostate worship poured,
And curst the faith their sires adored.
Yet has she hearts, mid all this ill,
O'er all this wreck high buoyant still
With hope and vengeance;--hearts that yet--
  Like gems, in darkness, issuing rays
They've treasured from the sun that's set,--
  Beam all the light of long-lost days!
And swords she hath, nor weak nor slow
 To second all such hearts can dare:
As he shall know, well, dearly know.
  Who sleeps in moonlight luxury there,
Tranquil as if his spirit lay
Becalmed in Heaven's approving ray.
Sleep on--for purer eyes than thine
Those waves are husht, those planets shine;
Sleep on and be thy rest unmoved
  By the white moonbeam's dazzling power;--
None but the loving and the loved
  Should be awake at this sweet hour.

And see--where high above those rocks
  That o'er the deep their shadows fling.
Yon turret stands;--where ebon locks,
  As glossy as the heron's wing
  Upon the turban of a king,[199]
Hang from the lattice, long and wild,--
'Tis she, that EMIR'S blooming child,
All truth and tenderness and grace,
Tho' born of such ungentle race;--
An image of Youth's radiant Fountain
Springing in a desolate mountain![200]

Oh what a pure and sacred thing
  Is Beauty curtained from the sight
Of the gross world, illumining
  One only mansion with her light!
Unseen by man's disturbing eye,--
  The flower that blooms beneath the sea,
Too deep for sunbeams, doth not lie
  Hid in more chaste obscurity.
So, HINDA. have thy face and mind,
Like holy mysteries, lain enshrined.
And oh! what transport for a lover
  To lift the veil that shades them o'er!--
Like those who all at once discover
  In the lone deep some fairy shore
  Where mortal never trod before,
And sleep and wake in scented airs
No lip had ever breathed but theirs.

Beautiful are the maids that glide
  On summer-eves thro' YEMEN'S[201] dales,
And bright the glancing looks they hide
  Behind their litters' roseate veils;--
And brides as delicate and fair
As the white jasmine flowers they wear,
Hath YEMEN in her blissful clime,
  Who lulled in cool kiosk or bower,[202]
Before their mirrors count the time[203]
  And grow still lovelier every hour.
But never yet hath bride or maid
  In ARABY'S gay Haram smiled.
Whose boasted brightness would not fade
  Before AL HASSAN'S blooming child.

  Light as the angel shapes that bless
An infant's dream, yet not the less
Rich in all woman's loveliness;--
With eyes so pure that from their ray
Dark Vice would turn abasht away,
Blinded like serpents when they gaze
Upon the emerald's virgin blaze;[204]--
Yet filled with all youth's sweet desires,
Mingling the meek and vestal fires
Of other worlds with all the bliss,
The fond, weak tenderness of this:
A soul too more than half divine,
  Where, thro' some shades of earthly feeling,
Religion's softened glories shine,
  Like light thro' summer foliage stealing,
Shedding a glow of such mild hue,
So warm and yet so shadowy too,
As makes the very darkness there
More beautiful than light elsewhere.

Such is the maid who at this hour
  Hath risen from her restless sleep
And sits alone in that high bower,
  Watching the still and shining deep.
Ah! 'twas not thus,--with tearful eyes
  And beating heart,--she used to gaze
On the magnificent earth and skies,
  In her own land, in happier days.
Why looks she now so anxious down
Among those rocks whose rugged frown
  Blackens the mirror of the deep?
Whom waits she all this lonely night?
  Too rough the rocks, too bold the steep,
For man to scale that turret's height!--

So deemed at least her thoughtful sire,
  When high, to catch the cool night-air
After the day-beam's withering fire,[205]
  He built her bower of freshness there,
And had it deckt with costliest skill
  And fondly thought it safe as fair:--
Think, reverend dreamer! think so still,
  Nor wake to learn what Love can dare;--
Love, all defying Love, who sees
No charm in trophies won with ease;--
Whose rarest, dearest fruits of bliss
Are plucked on Danger's precipice!
Bolder than they who dare not dive
  For pearls but when the sea's at rest,
Love, in the tempest most alive,
  Hath ever held that pearl the best
He finds beneath the stormiest water.
Yes, ARABY'S unrivalled daughter,
Tho' high that tower, that rock-way rude,
  There's one who but to kiss thy cheek
Would climb the untrodden solitude
Of ARARAT'S tremendous peak,[206]
And think its steeps, tho' dark and dread,
Heaven's pathways, if to thee they led!
Even now thou seest the flashing spray,
That lights his oar's impatient way;--
Even now thou hearest the sudden shock
Of his swift bark against the rock,
And stretchest down thy arms of snow
As if to lift him from below!
Like her to whom at dead of night
The bridegroom with his locks of light[207]
Came in the flush of love and pride
And scaled the terrace of his bride;--
When as she saw him rashly spring,
And midway up in danger cling,
She flung him down her long black hair,
Exclaiming breathless, "There, love, there!"
And scarce did manlier nerve uphold
  The hero ZAL in that fond hour,
Than wings the youth who, fleet and bold,
  Now climbs the rocks to HINDA'S bower.
See-light as up their granite steeps
The rock-goats of ARABIA clamber,[208]
Fearless from crag to crag he leaps,
  And now is in the maiden's chamber.
She loves--but knows not whom she loves,
  Nor what his race, nor whence he came;--
Like one who meets in Indian groves
  Some beauteous bird without a name;
Brought by the last ambrosial breeze
From isles in the undiscovered seas,
To show his plumage for a day
To wondering eyes and wing away!
Will he thus fly--her nameless lover?
  ALLA forbid! 'twas by a moon
As fair as this, while singing over
Some ditty to her soft Kanoon,
Alone, at this same witching hour,
  She first beheld his radiant eyes
Gleam thro' the lattice of the bower,
  Where nightly now they mix their sighs;
And thought some spirit of the air
(For what could waft a mortal there?)
Was pausing on his moonlight way
To listen to her lonely lay!
This fancy ne'er hath left her mind:
  And--tho', when terror's swoon had past,
She saw a youth of mortal kind
  Before her in obeisance cast,--
Yet often since, when he hath spoken
Strange, awful words,--and gleams have broken
From his dark eyes, too bright to bear,
  Oh! she hath feared her soul was given
To some unhallowed child of air,
  Some erring spirit cast from heaven,
Like those angelic youths of old
Who burned for maids of mortal mould,
Bewildered left the glorious skies
And lost their heaven for woman's eyes.
Fond girl! nor fiend nor angel he
Who woos thy young simplicity;
But one of earth's impassioned sons,
  As warm in love, as fierce in ire
As the best heart whose current runs
  Full of the Day-God's living fire.

But quenched to-night that ardor seems,
  And pale his cheek and sunk his brow;--
Never before but in her dreams
  Had she beheld him pale as now:
And those were dreams of troubled sleep
From which 'twas joy to wake and weep;
Visions that will not be forgot,
  But sadden every waking scene
Like warning ghosts that leave the spot
  All withered where they once have been.

  "How sweetly," said the trembling maid,
Of her own gentle voice afraid,
So long had they in silence stood
Looking upon that tranquil flood--
"How sweetly does the moonbeam smile
"To-night upon yon leafy isle!
"Oft, in my fancy's wanderings,
"I've wisht that little isle had wings,
"And we within its fairy bowers
  "Were wafted off to seas unknown,
"Where not a pulse should beat but ours,
  "And we might live, love, die, alone!
"Far from the cruel and the cold,--
  "Where the bright eyes of angels only
"Should come around us to behold
  "A paradise so pure and lonely.
"Would this be world enough for thee?"--
Playful she turned that he might see
  The passing smile her cheek put on;
But when she markt how mournfully
  His eye met hers, that smile was gone;
And bursting into heart-felt tears,
"Yes, yes," she cried, "my hourly fears,
"My dreams have boded all too right--
"We part--for ever part--tonight!
"I knew, I knew it _could_ not last--
"'Twas bright, 'twas heavenly, but 'tis past!
"Oh! ever thus from childhood's hour
"I've seen my fondest hopes decay;
"I never loved a tree or flower,
  "But 'twas the first to fade away.
"I never nurst a dear gazelle
  "To glad me with its soft black eye
"But when it came to know me well
  "And love me it was sure to die I
"Now too--the joy most like divine
  "Of all I ever dreamt or knew,
"To see thee, hear thee, call thee mine,--
  "Oh misery! must I lose _that_ too?
"Yet go--on peril's brink we meet;--
  "Those frightful rocks--that treacherous sea--
"No, never come again--tho' sweet,
  "Tho' heaven, it may be death to thee.
"Farewell--and blessings on thy way,
  "Where'er thou goest, beloved stranger!
"Better to sit and watch that ray
"And think thee safe, tho' far away,
  "Than have thee near me and in danger!"

"Danger!--oh, tempt me not to boast"--
The youth exclaimed--"thou little know'st
"What he can brave, who, born and nurst
"In Danger's paths, has dared her worst;
"Upon whose ear the signal-word
  "Of strife and death is hourly breaking;
"Who sleeps with head upon the sword
  "His fevered hand must grasp in waking.
"Danger!"--
    "Say on--thou fearest not then,
"And we may meet--oft meet again?"

"Oh! look not so--beneath the skies
"I now fear nothing but those eyes.
"If aught on earth could charm or force
"My spirit from its destined course,--
"If aught could make this soul forget
"The bond to which its seal is set,
"'Twould be those eyes;--they, only they,
"Could melt that sacred seal away!
"But no--'tis fixt--_my_ awful doom
"Is fixt--on this side of the tomb
"We meet no more;--why, why did Heaven
"Mingle two souls that earth has riven,
"Has rent asunder wide as ours?
"Oh, Arab maid, as soon the Powers
"Of Light and Darkness may combine.
"As I be linkt with thee or thine!
"Thy Father"--
    "Holy ALLA save
  "His gray head from that lightning glance!
"Thou knowest him not--he loves the brave;
  "Nor lives there under heaven's expanse
"One who would prize, would worship thee
"And thy bold spirit more than he.
"Oft when in childhood I have played
  "With the bright falchion by his side,
"I've heard him swear his lisping maid
  "In time should be a warrior's bride.
"And still whene'er at Haram hours
"I take him cool sherbets and flowers,
"He tells me when in playful mood
  "A hero shall my bridegroom be,
"Since maids are best in battle wooed,
  "And won with shouts of victory!
"Nay, turn not from me--thou alone
"Art formed to make both hearts thy own.
"Go--join his sacred ranks--thou knowest
  "The unholy strife these Persians wage:--
"Good Heaven, that frown!--even now thou glowest
  "With more than mortal warrior's rage.
"Haste to the camp by morning's light,
"And when that sword is raised in fight,
"Oh still remember, Love and I
"Beneath its shadow trembling lie!
"One victory o'er those Slaves of Fire,
"Those impious Ghebers whom my sire
"Abhors"--
    "Hold, hold--thy words are death"--
  The stranger cried as wild he flung
His mantle back and showed beneath
  The Gheber belt that round him clung.[209]--
"Here, maiden, look--weep--blush to see
"All that thy sire abhors in me!
"Yes--_I_ am of that impious race,
  "Those Slaves of Fire who, morn and even,
"Hail their Creator's dwelling-place
  "Among the living lights of heaven:[210]
"Yes--_I_ am of that outcast few,
"To IRAN and to vengeance true,
"Who curse the hour your Arabs came
"To desolate our shrines of flame,
"And swear before God's burning eye
"To break our country's chains or die!
"Thy bigot sire,--nay, tremble not,--
  "He who gave birth to those dear eyes
"With me is sacred as the spot
  "From which our fires of worship rise!
"But know--'twas he I sought that night,
  "When from my watch-boat on the sea
"I caught this turret's glimmering light,
  "And up the rude rocks desperately
"Rusht to my prey--thou knowest the rest--
"I climbed the gory vulture's nest,
"And found a trembling dove within;--
"Thine, thine the victory--thine the sin--
"If Love hath made one thought his own,
"That Vengeance claims first--last--alone!
"Oh? had we never, never met,
"Or could this heart even now forget
"How linkt, how blest we might have been,
"Had fate not frowned so dark between!
"Hadst thou been born a Persian maid,
  "In neighboring valleys had we dwelt,
"Thro' the same fields in childhood played,
  "At the same kindling altar knelt,--
"Then, then, while all those nameless ties
"In which the charm of Country lies
"Had round our hearts been hourly spun,
"Till IRAN'S cause and thine were one;
"While in thy lute's awakening sigh
"I heard the voice of days gone by,
"And saw in every smile of thine
"Returning hours of glory shine;--
"While the wronged Spirit of our Land
  "Lived, lookt, and spoke her wrongs thro' thee,--
"God! who could then this sword withstand?
  "Its very flash were victory!
"But now--estranged, divorced for ever,
"Far as the grasp of Fate can sever;
"Our only ties what love has wove,--
"In faith, friends, country, sundered wide;
"And then, then only, true to love,
  "When false to all that's dear beside!
"Thy father IKAN'S deadliest foe--
"Thyself, perhaps, even now--but no--
"Hate never looked so lovely yet!
  No--sacred to thy soul will be
"The land of him who could forget
  "All but that bleeding land for thee.
"When other eyes shall see, unmoved,
  "Her widows mourn, her warriors fall,
"Thou'lt think how well one Gheber loved.
  "And for _his_ sake thou'lt weep for all!
"But look"--
    With sudden start he turned
  And pointed to the distant wave
Where lights like charnel meteors burned
  Bluely as o'er some seaman's grave;
And fiery darts at intervals[211]
  Flew up all sparkling from the main
As if each star that nightly falls
Were shooting back to heaven again.
"My signal lights!--I must away--
"Both, both are ruined, if I stay.
"Farewell--sweet life! thou clingest in vain--
"Now, Vengeance, I am thine again!"
Fiercely he broke away, nor stopt,
Nor lookt--but from the lattice dropt
Down mid the pointed crags beneath
As if he fled from love to death.
While pale and mute young HINDA stood,
Nor moved till in the silent flood
A momentary plunge below
Startled her from her trance of woe;--
Shrieking she to the lattice flew,
  "I come--I come--if in that tide
"Thou sleepest to-night, I'll sleep there too
  "In death's cold wedlock by thy side.
"Oh! I would ask no happier bed
  "Than the chill wave my love lies under:--
"Sweeter to rest together dead,
  "Far sweeter than to live asunder!"
But no--their hour is not yet come--
  Again she sees his pinnace fly,
Wafting him fleetly to his home,
  Where'er that ill-starred home may lie;
And calm and smooth it seemed to win
  Its moonlight way before the wind
As if it bore all peace within
  Nor left one breaking heart behind!


The Princess whose heart was sad enough already could have wished that
FERAMORZ had chosen a less melancholy story; as it is only to the happy
that tears are a luxury. Her Ladies however were by no means sorry that
love was once more the Poet's theme; for, whenever he spoke of love, they
said, his voice was as sweet as if he had chewed the leaves of that
enchanted tree, which grows over the tomb of the musician, Tan-Sein.[212]

Their road all the morning had lain through a very dreary country;--
through valleys, covered with a low bushy jungle, where in more than one
place the awful signal of the bamboo staff[213] with the white flag at
its top reminded the traveller that in that very spot the tiger had made
some human creature his victim. It was therefore with much pleasure that
they arrived at sunset in a safe and lovely glen and encamped under one of
those holy trees whose smooth columns and spreading roofs seem to destine
them for natural temples of religion. Beneath this spacious shade some
pious hands had erected a row of pillars ornamented with the most
beautiful porcelain[214] which now supplied the use of mirrors to the
young maidens as they adjusted their hair in descending from the
palankeens. Here while as usual the Princess sat listening anxiously with
FADLADEEN in one of his loftiest moods of criticism by her side the young
Poet leaning against a branch of the tree thus continued his story:--


The morn hath risen clear and calm
  And o'er the Green Sea[215] palely shines,
Revealing BAHREIN'S groves of palm
  And lighting KISHMA'S amber vines.
Fresh smell the shores of ARABY,
  While breezes from the Indian sea
Blow round SELAMA'S[216] sainted cape
  And curl the shining flood beneath,--
Whose waves are rich with many a grape
  And cocoa-nut and flowery wreath
Which pious seamen as they past
Had toward that holy headland cast--
Oblations to the Genii there
For gentle skies and breezes fair!
The nightingale now bends her flight[217]
From the high trees where all the night
  She sung so sweet with none to listen;
And hides her from the morning star
  Where thickets of pomegranate glisten
In the clear dawn,--bespangled o'er
  With dew whose night-drops would not stain
The best and brightest scimitar[218]
That ever youthful Sultan wore
  On the first morning of his reign.

And see--the Sun himself!--on wings
Of glory up the East he springs.
Angel of Light! who from the time
Those heavens began their march sublime,
Hath first of all the starry choir
Trod in his Maker's steps of fire!
  Where are the days, thou wondrous sphere,
When IRAN, like a sun-flower, turned
To meet that eye where'er it burned?--
  When from the banks of BENDEMEER
To the nut-groves of SAMARCAND
Thy temples flamed o'er all the land?
Where are they? ask the shades of them
  Who, on CADESSIA'S[219] bloody plains,
Saw fierce invaders pluck the gem
From IRAN'S broken diadem,
  And bind her ancient faith in chains:--
Ask the poor exile cast alone
On foreign shores, unloved, unknown,
Beyond the Caspian's Iron Gates,
  Or on the snowy Mossian mountains,
Far from his beauteous land of dates,
  Her jasmine bowers and sunny fountains:
Yet happier so than if he trod
His own beloved but blighted sod
Beneath a despot stranger's nod!--
Oh, he would rather houseless roam
  Where Freedom and his God may lead,
Than be the sleekest slave at home
  That crouches to the conqueror's creed!

Is IRAN'S pride then gone for ever,
  Quenched with the flame in MITHRA'S caves?
No--she has sons that never--never--
  Will stoop to be the Moslem's slaves
  While heaven has light or earth has graves;--
Spirits of fire that brood not long
But flash resentment back for wrong;
And hearts where, slow but deep, the seeds
Of vengeance ripen into deeds,
Till in some treacherous hour of calm
They burst like ZEILAN'S giant palm[220]
Whose buds fly open with a sound
That shakes the pigmy forests round!
Yes, EMIR! he, who scaled that tower,
  And had he reached thy slumbering breast
Had taught thee in a Gheber's power
  How safe even tyrant heads may rest--
Is one of many, brave as he,
Who loathe thy haughty race and thee;
Who tho' they knew the strife is vain,
Who tho' they know the riven chain
Snaps but to enter in the heart
Of him who rends its links apart,
Yet dare the issue,--blest to be
Even for one bleeding moment free
And die in pangs of liberty!
Thou knowest them well--'tis some moons since
  Thy turbaned troops and blood-red flags,
Thou satrap of a bigot Prince,
  Have swarmed among these Green Sea crags;
Yet here, even here, a sacred band
Ay, in the portal of that land
Thou, Arab, darest to call thy own,
Their spears across thy path have thrown;
Here--ere the winds half winged thee o'er--
Rebellion braved thee from the shore.

Rebellion! foul, dishonoring word,
  Whose wrongful blight so oft has stained
The holiest cause that tongue or sword
  Of mortal ever lost or gained.
How many a spirit born to bless
  Hath sunk beneath that withering name,
Whom but a day's, an hour's success
  Had wafted to eternal fame!
As exhalations when they burst
From the warm earth if chilled at first,
If checkt in soaring from the plain
Darken to fogs and sink again;--
But if they once triumphant spread
Their wings above the mountain-head,
Become enthroned in upper air,
And turn to sun-bright glories there!

And who is he that wields the might
  Of Freedom on the Green Sea brink,
Before whose sabre's dazzling light[221]
  The eyes of YEMEN'S warriors wink?
Who comes embowered in the spears
Of KERMAN'S hardy mountaineers?
Those mountaineers that truest, last,
  Cling to their country's ancient rites,
As if that God whose eyelids cast
  Their closing gleam on IRAN'S heights,
Among her snowy mountains threw
The last light of his worship too!
'Tis HAFED--name of fear, whose sound
  Chills like the muttering of a charm!--
Shout but that awful name around,
  And palsy shakes the manliest arm.

'Tis HAFED, most accurst and dire
(So rankt by Moslem hate and ire)
Of all the rebel Sons of Fire;
Of whose malign, tremendous power
The Arabs at their mid-watch hour
Such tales of fearful wonder tell
That each affrighted sentinel
Pulls down his cowl upon his eyes,
Lest HAFED in the midst should rise!
A man, they say, of monstrous birth,
A mingled race of flame and earth,
Sprung from those old, enchanted kings[222]
  Who in their fairy helms of yore
A feather from the mystic wings
  Of the Simoorgh resistless wore;
And gifted by the Fiends of Fire,
Who groaned to see their shrines expire
With charms that all in vain withstood
Would drown the Koran's light in blood!

Such were the tales that won belief,
  And such the coloring Fancy gave
To a young, warm, and dauntless Chief,--
  One who, no more than mortal brave,
Fought for the land his soul adored,
  For happy homes and altars free,--
His only talisman, the sword,
  His only spell-word, Liberty!
One of that ancient hero line,
Along whose glorious current shine
Names that have sanctified their blood:
As LEBANON'S small mountain-flood
Is rendered holy by the ranks
Of sainted cedars on its banks.[223]
'Twas not for him to crouch the knee
Tamely to Moslem tyranny;
'Twas not for him whose soul was cast
In the bright mould of ages past,
Whose melancholy spirit fed
With all the glories of the dead
Tho' framed for IRAN'S happiest years.
Was born among her chains and tears!--
'Twas not for him to swell the crowd
Of slavish heads, that shrinking bowed
Before the Moslem as he past
Like shrubs beneath the poison-blast--
No--far he fled--indignant fled
  The pageant of his country's shame;
While every tear her children shed
  Fell on his soul like drops of flame;
And as a lover hails the dawn
  Of a first smile, so welcomed he
The sparkle of the first sword drawn
  For vengeance and for liberty!
But vain was valor--vain the flower
Of KERMAN, in that deathful hour,
Against AL HASSAN'S whelming power.--
In vain they met him helm to helm
Upon the threshold of that realm
He came in bigot pomp to sway,
And with their corpses blockt his way--
In vain--for every lance they raised
Thousands around the conqueror blazed;
For every arm that lined their shore
Myriads of slaves were wafted o'er,--
A bloody, bold, and countless crowd,
Before whose swarm as fast they bowed
As dates beneath the locust cloud.

There stood--but one short league away
From old HARMOZIA'S sultry bay--
A rocky mountain o'er the Sea--
Of OMAN beetling awfully;[224]
A last and solitary link
  Of those stupendous chains that reach
From the broad Caspian's reedy brink
  Down winding to the Green Sea beach.
Around its base the bare rocks stood
Like naked giants, in the flood
  As if to guard the Gulf across;
While on its peak that braved the sky
A ruined Temple towered so high
  That oft the sleeping albatross[225]
Struck the wild ruins with her wing,
And from her cloud-rockt slumbering
Started--to find man's dwelling there
In her own silent fields of air!
Beneath, terrific caverns gave
Dark welcome to each stormy wave
That dasht like midnight revellers in;--
And such the strange, mysterious din
At times throughout those caverns rolled,--
And such the fearful wonders told
Of restless sprites imprisoned there,
That bold were Moslem who would dare
At twilight hour to steer his skiff
Beneath the Gheber's lonely cliff.[226]
On the land side those towers sublime,
That seemed above the grasp of Time,
Were severed from the haunts of men
By a wide, deep, and wizard glen,
So fathomless, so full of gloom,
  No eye could pierce the void between:
It seemed a place where Ghouls might come
With their foul banquets from the tomb
  And in its caverns feed unseen.
Like distant thunder, from below
  The sound of many torrents came,
Too deep for eye or ear to know
If 'twere the sea's imprisoned flow,
  Or floods of ever-restless flame.
For each ravine, each rocky spire
Of that vast mountain stood on fire;[227]
And tho' for ever past the days
When God was worshipt in the blaze--
That from its lofty altar shone,--
Tho' fled the priests, the votaries gone,
Still did the mighty flame burn on,[228]
Thro' chance and change, thro' good and ill,
Like its own God's eternal will,
Deep, constant, bright, unquenchable!

Thither the vanquisht HAFED led
  His little army's last remains;--
"Welcome, terrific glen!" he said,
"Thy gloom, that Eblis' self might dread,
  "Is Heaven to him who flies from chains!"
O'er a dark, narrow bridge-way known
To him and to his Chiefs alone
They crost the chasm and gained the towers;--
"This home," he cried, "at least is ours;
"Here we may bleed, unmockt by hymns
  "Of Moslem triumph o'er our head;
"Here we may fall nor leave our limbs
  "To quiver to the Moslem's tread.
"Stretched on this rock while vultures' beaks
"Are whetted on our yet warm cheeks,
"Here--happy that no tyrant's eye
"Gloats on our torments--we may die!"--

'Twas night when to those towers they came,
And gloomily the fitful flame
That from the ruined altar broke
Glared on his features as he spoke:--
"'Tis o'er--what men could do, we've done--
"If IRAN _will_ look tamely on
"And see her priests, her warriors driven
  "Before a sensual bigot's nod,
"A wretch who shrines his lusts in heaven
  "And makes a pander of his God;
"If her proud sons, her high-born souls,
  "Men in whose veins--oh last disgrace!
"The blood of ZAL and RUSTAM[229] rolls.--
  "If they _will_ court this upstart race
"And turn from MITHRA'S ancient ray
"To kneel at shrines of yesterday;
"If they _will_ crouch to IRAN'S foes,
  "Why, let them--till the land's despair
"Cries out to Heaven, and bondage grows
  "Too vile for even the vile to bear!
"Till shame at last, long hidden, burns
"Their inmost core, and conscience turns
"Each coward tear the slave lets fall
"Back on his heart in drops of gall.
"But here at least are arms unchained
"And souls that thraldom never stained;--
  "This spot at least no foot of slave
"Or satrap ever yet profaned,
  "And tho' but few--tho' fast the wave
"Of life is ebbing from our veins,
"Enough for vengeance still remains.
"As panthers after set of sun
"Rush from the roots of LEBANON
"Across the dark sea-robber's way,[230]
"We'll bound upon our startled prey.
"And when some hearts that proudest swell
"Have felt our falchion's last farewell,
"When Hope's expiring throb is o'er
"And even Despair can prompt no more,
"This spot shall be the sacred grave
"Of the last few who vainly brave
"Die for the land they cannot save!"

His Chiefs stood round--each shining blade
Upon the broken altar laid--
And tho' so wild and desolate
Those courts where once the Mighty sate:
Nor longer on those mouldering towers
Was seen the feast of fruits and flowers
With which of old the Magi fed
The wandering Spirits of their Dead;[231]
Tho' neither priest nor rites were there,
  Nor charmed leaf of pure pomegranate,[232]
Nor hymn, nor censer's fragrant air,
  Nor symbol of their worshipt planet;[233]
Yet the same God that heard their sires
Heard _them_ while on that altar's fires
They swore the latest, holiest deed
Of the few hearts, still left to bleed,
Should be in IRAN'S injured name
To die upon that Mount of Flame--
The last of all her patriot line,
Before her last untrampled Shrine!

Brave, suffering souls! they little knew
How many a tear their injuries drew
From one meek maid, one gentle foe,
Whom love first touched with others' woe--
Whose life, as free from thought as sin,
Slept like a lake till Love threw in
His talisman and woke the tide
And spread its trembling circles wide.
Once, EMIR! thy unheeding child
Mid all this havoc bloomed and smiled,--
Tranquil as on some battle plain
  The Persian lily shines and towers[234]
Before the combat's reddening stain
  Hath fallen upon her golden flowers.
Light-hearted maid, unawed, unmoved,
While Heaven but spared the sire she loved,
Once at thy evening tales of blood
Unlistening and aloof she stood--
And oft when thou hast paced along
  Thy Haram halls with furious heat,
Hast thou not curst her cheerful song,
  That came across thee, calm and sweet,
Like lutes of angels touched so near
Hell's confines that the damned can hear!

Far other feelings Love hath brought--
  Her soul all flame, her brow all sadness,
She now has but the one dear thought,
  And thinks that o'er, almost to madness!
Oft doth her sinking heart recall
His words--"for _my_ sake weep for all;"
And bitterly as day on day
  Of rebel carnage fast succeeds,
She weeps a lover snatched away
  In every Gheber wretch that bleeds.
There's not a sabre meets her eye
  But with his life-blood seems to swim;
There's not an arrow wings the sky
  But fancy turns its point to him.
No more she brings with footsteps light
AL HASSAN's falchion for the fight;
And--had he lookt with clearer sight,
Had not the mists that ever rise
From a foul spirit dimmed his eyes--
He would have markt her shuddering frame,
When from the field of blood he came,
The faltering speech--the look estranged--
Voice, step and life and beauty changed--
He would have markt all this, and known
Such change is wrought by Love alone!
Ah! not the Love that should have blest
So young, so innocent a breast;
Not the pure, open, prosperous Love,
That, pledged on earth and sealed above,
Grows in the world's approving eyes,
  In friendship's smile and home's caress,
Collecting all the heart's sweet ties
  Into one knot of happiness!
No, HINDA, no,--thy fatal flame
Is nurst in silence, sorrow, shame;--
  A passion without hope or pleasure,
In thy soul's darkness buried deep,
  It lies like some ill-gotten treasure,--
Some idol without shrine or name,
O'er which its pale-eyed votaries keep
Unholy watch while others sleep.

Seven nights have darkened OMAN'S sea,
  Since last beneath the moonlight ray
She saw his light oar rapidly
  Hurry her Gheber's bark away,--
And still she goes at midnight hour
To weep alone in that high bower
And watch and look along the deep
For him whose smiles first made her weep;--
But watching, weeping, all was vain,
She never saw his bark again.
The owlet's solitary cry,
The night-hawk flitting darkly by,
  And oft the hateful carrion bird,
Heavily flapping his clogged wing,
Which reeked with that day's banqueting--
  Was all she saw, was all she heard.

'Tis the eighth morn--AL HASSAN'S brow
  Is brightened with unusual joy--
What mighty mischief glads him now,
  Who never smiles but to destroy?
The sparkle upon HERKEND'S Sea,
When tost at midnight furiously,[235]
Tells not of wreck and ruin nigh,
More surely than that smiling eye!
"Up, daughter, up--the KERNA'S[236] breath
"Has blown a blast would waken death,
"And yet thou sleepest--up, child, and see
"This blessed day for heaven and me,
"A day more rich in Pagan blood
"Than ever flasht o'er OMAN'S flood.
"Before another dawn shall shine,
"His head--heart--limbs--will all be mine;
"This very night his blood shall steep
"These hands all over ere I sleep!"--

"_His_ blood!" she faintly screamed--her mind
Still singling _one_ from all mankind--
"Yes--spite of his ravines and towers,
"HAFED, my child, this night is ours.
"Thanks to all-conquering treachery,
  "Without whose aid the links accurst,
"That bind these impious slaves, would be
  "Too strong for ALLA'S self to burst!
"That rebel fiend whose blade has spread
"My path with piles of Moslem dead,
"Whose baffling spells had almost driven
"Back from their course the Swords of Heaven,
"This night with all his band shall know
"How deep an Arab's steel can go,
"When God and Vengeance speed the blow.
"And--Prophet! by that holy wreath
"Thou worest on OHOD'S field of death,[237]
"I swear, for every sob that parts
"In anguish from these heathen hearts,
"A gem from PERSIA'S plundered mines
"Shall glitter on thy shrine of Shrines.
"But, ha!--she sinks--that look so wild--
"Those livid lips--my child, my child,
"This life of blood befits not thee,
"And thou must back to ARABY.
  "Ne'er had I riskt thy timid sex
"In scenes that man himself might dread,
"Had I not hoped our every tread
  "Would be on prostrate Persian necks--
"Curst race, they offer swords instead!
"But cheer thee, maid,--the wind that now
"Is blowing o'er thy feverish brow
"To-day shall waft thee from the shore;
"And ere a drop of this night's gore
"Have time to chill in yonder towers,
"Thou'lt see thy own sweet Arab bowers!"

His bloody boast was all too true;
There lurkt one wretch among the few
Whom HAFED'S eagle eye could count
Around him on that Fiery Mount,--
One miscreant who for gold betrayed
The pathway thro' the valley's shade
To those high towers where Freedom stood
In her last hold of flame and blood.
Left on the field last dreadful night,
When sallying from their sacred height
The Ghebers fought hope's farewell fight,
He lay--but died not with the brave;
That sun which should have gilt his grave
Saw him a traitor and a slave;--
And while the few who thence returned
To their high rocky fortress mourned
For him among the matchless dead
They left behind on glory's bed,
He lived, and in the face of morn
Laught them and Faith and
  Heaven to scorn.

Oh for a tongue to curse the slave
  Whose treason like a deadly blight
Comes o'er the councils of the brave
And blasts them in their hour of might!
May Life's unblessed cup for him
Be drugged with treacheries to the brim.--
With hopes that but allure to fly,
  With joys that vanish while he sips,
Like Dead-Sea fruits that tempt the eye,
  But turn to ashes on the lips![238]
His country's curse, his children's shame,
Outcast of virtue, peace and fame,
May he at last with lips of flame
On the parched desert thirsting die,--
While lakes that shone in mockery nigh,[239]
Are fading off, untouched, untasted,
Like the once glorious hopes he blasted!
And when from earth his spirit flies,
  Just Prophet, let the damned-one dwell
Full in the sight of Paradise
  Beholding heaven and feeling hell!


LALLA ROOKH had the night before been visited by a dream which in spite of
the impending fate of poor HAFED made her heart more than usually cheerful
during the morning and gave her cheeks all the freshened animation of a
flower that the Bidmusk had just passed over.[240] She fancied that she
was sailing on that Eastern Ocean where the sea-gypsies who live for ever
on the water[241] enjoy a perpetual summer in wandering from isle to isle
when she saw a small gilded bark approaching her. It was like one of those
boats which the Maldivian islanders send adrift, at the mercy of winds and
waves, loaded with perfumes, flowers, and odoriferous wood, as an offering
to the Spirit whom they call King of the Sea. At first, this little bark
appeared to be empty but on coming nearer--

She had proceeded thus far in relating the dream to her Ladies, when
FERAMORZ appeared at the door of the pavilion. In his presence of course
everything else was forgotten and the continuance of the story was
instantly requested by all. Fresh wood of aloes was set to burn in the
cassolets;--the violet sherbets[242] were hastily handed round, and after
a short prelude on his lute in the pathetic measure of Nava,[243] which is
always used to express the lamentations of absent lovers, the Poet thus
continued:--


The day is lowering--stilly black
Sleeps the grim wave, while heaven's rack,
Disperst and wild, 'twixt earth and sky
Hangs like a shattered canopy.
There's not a cloud in that blue plain
  But tells of storm to come or past;--
Here flying loosely as the mane
  Of a young war-horse in the blast;--
There rolled in masses dark and swelling,
As proud to be the thunder's dwelling!
While some already burst and riven
Seen melting down the verge of heaven;
As tho' the infant storm had rent
The mighty womb that gave him birth,
And having swept the firmament
  Was now in fierce career for earth.

On earth 'twas yet all calm around,
A pulseless silence, dread, profound,
More awful than the tempest's sound.
The diver steered for ORMUS' bowers,
And moored his skiff till calmer hours;
The sea-birds with portentous screech
Flew fast to land;--upon the beach
The pilot oft had paused, with glance
Turned upward to that wild expanse;--
And all was boding, drear and dark
As her own soul when HINDA'S bark
Went slowly from the Persian shore.--
No music timed her parting oar,[244]
Nor friends upon the lessening strand
Lingering to wave the unseen hand
Or speak the farewell, heard no more;--
But lone, unheeded, from the bay
The vessel takes its mournful way,
Like some ill-destined bark that steers
In silence thro' the Gate of Tears.[245]
And where was stern AL HASSAN then?
Could not that saintly scourge of men
From bloodshed and devotion spare
One minute for a farewell there?
No--close within in changeful fits
Of cursing and of prayer he sits
In savage loneliness to brood
Upon the coming night of blood,--
  With that keen, second-scent of death,
By which the vulture snuffs his food
  In the still warm and living breath![246]
While o'er the wave his weeping daughter
Is wafted from these scenes of slaughter,--
As a young bird of BABYLON,[247]
Let loose to tell of victory won,
Flies home, with wing, ah! not unstained
By the red hands that held her chained.

And does the long-left home she seeks
Light up no gladness on her cheeks?
The flowers she nurst--the well-known groves,
Where oft in dreams her spirit roves--
Once more to see her dear gazelles
Come bounding with their silver bells;
Her birds' new plumage to behold
  And the gay, gleaming fishes count,
She left all filleted with gold
  Shooting around their jasper fount;[248]
Her little garden mosque to see,
  And once again, at evening hour,
To tell her ruby rosary
  In her own sweet acacia bower.--
Can these delights that wait her now
Call up no sunshine on her brow?
No,--silent, from her train apart,--
As if even now she felt at heart
The chill of her approaching doom,--
She sits, all lovely in her gloom
As a pale Angel of the Grave;
And o'er the wide, tempestuous wave
Looks with a shudder to those towers
Where in a few short awful hours
Blood, blood, in streaming tides shall run,
Foul incense for to-morrow's sun!
"Where art thou, glorious stranger! thou,
"So loved, so lost, where art thou now?
"Foe--Gheber--infidel--whate'er
"The unhallowed name thou'rt doomed to bear,
"Still glorious--still to this fond heart
"Dear as its blood, whate'er thou art!
"Yes--ALLA, dreadful ALLA! yes--
"If there be wrong, be crime in this,
"Let the black waves that round us roll,
"Whelm me this instant ere my soul
"Forgetting faith--home--father--all
"Before its earthly idol fall,
"Nor worship even Thyself above him--
"For, oh, so wildly do I love him,
"Thy Paradise itself were dim
"And joyless, if not shared with him!"
Her hands were claspt--her eyes upturned,
  Dropping their tears like moonlight rain;
And, tho' her lip, fond raver! burned
  With words of passion, bold, profane.
Yet was there light around her brow,
  A holiness in those dark eyes,
Which showed,--tho' wandering earthward now,--
  Her spirit's home was in the skies.
Yes--for a spirit pure as hers
Is always pure, even while it errs;
As sunshine broken in the rill
Tho' turned astray is sunshine still!

So wholly had her mind forgot
All thoughts but one she heeded not
The rising storm--the wave that cast
A moment's midnight as it past--
Nor heard the frequent shout, the tread
Of gathering tumult o'er her head--
Clasht swords and tongues that seemed to vie
With the rude riot of the sky.--
But, hark!--that war-whoop on the deck--
  That crash as if each engine there,
Mast, sails and all, were gone to wreck,
  Mid yells and stampings of despair!
Merciful Heaven! what _can_ it be?
'Tis not the storm, tho' fearfully
The ship has shuddered as she rode
O'er mountain-waves--"Forgive me, God!
"Forgive me"--shrieked the maid and knelt,
Trembling all over--for she felt
As if her judgment hour was near;
While crouching round half dead with fear,
Her handmaids clung, nor breathed nor stirred--
When, hark!--a second crash--a third--
And now as if a bolt of thunder
Had riven the laboring planks asunder,
The deck falls in--what horrors then!
Blood, waves and tackle, swords and men
Come mixt together thro' the chasm,--
Some wretches in their dying spasm
Still fighting on--and some that call
"For GOD and IRAN!" as they fall!
Whose was the hand that turned away
The perils of the infuriate fray,
And snatcht her breathless from beneath
This wilderment of wreck and death?
She knew not--for a faintness came
Chill o'er her and her sinking frame
Amid the ruins of that hour
Lay like a pale and scorched flower
Beneath the red volcano's shower.
But, oh! the sights and sounds of dread
That shockt her ere her senses fled!
The yawning deck--the crowd that strove
Upon the tottering planks above--
The sail whose fragments, shivering o'er
The stragglers' heads all dasht with gore
Fluttered like bloody flags--the clash
Of sabres and the lightning's flash
Upon their blades, high tost about
Like meteor brands[249]--as if throughout
  The elements one fury ran,
One general rage that left a doubt
  Which was the fiercer, Heaven or Man!
Once too--but no--it could not be--
  'Twas fancy all--yet once she thought,
While yet her fading eyes could see
  High on the ruined deck she caught
A glimpse of that unearthly form,
  That glory of her soul,--even then,
Amid the whirl of wreck and storm,
  Shining above his fellow-men,
As on some black and troublous night
The Star of EGYPT,[250] whose proud light
Never hath beamed on those who rest
In the White Islands of the West,
Burns thro' the storm with looks of flame
That put Heaven's cloudier eyes to shame.
But no--'twas but the minute's dream--
A fantasy--and ere the scream
Had half-way past her pallid lips,
A death-like swoon, a chill eclipse
Of soul and sense its darkness spread
Around her and she sunk as dead.
How calm, how beautiful comes on
The stilly hour when storms are gone,
When warring winds have died away,
And clouds beneath the glancing ray
Melt off and leave the land and sea
Sleeping in bright tranquillity,--
Fresh as if Day again were born,
Again upon the lap of Morn!--
When the light blossoms rudely torn
And scattered at the whirlwind's will,
Hang floating in the pure air still,
Filling it all with precious balm,
In gratitude for this sweet calm;--
And every drop the thundershowers
Have left upon the grass and flowers
Sparkles, as 'twere that lightning-gem[251]
Whose liquid flame is born of them!
When, 'stead of one unchanging breeze,
  There blow a thousand gentle airs
  And each a different perfume bears,--
As if the loveliest plants and trees
Had vassal breezes of their own
To watch and wait on them alone,
And waft no other breath than theirs:
When the blue waters rise and fall,
In sleepy sunshine mantling all;
And even that swell the tempest leaves
Is like the full and silent heaves
Of lovers' hearts when newly blest,
Too newly to be quite at rest.

Such was the golden hour that broke
Upon the world when HINDA woke
From her long trance and heard around
No motion but the water's sound
Rippling against the vessel's side,
As slow it mounted o'er the tide.--
But where is she?--her eyes are dark,
Are wilder still--is this the bark,
The same, that from HARMOZIA'S bay
Bore her at morn--whose bloody way
The sea-dog trackt?--no--strange and new
Is all that meets her wondering view.
Upon a galliot's deck she lies,
  Beneath no rich pavilion's shade,--
No plumes to fan her sleeping eyes,
  Nor jasmine on her pillow laid.
But the rude litter roughly spread
With war-cloaks is her homely bed,
And shawl and sash on javelins hung
For awning o'er her head are flung.
Shuddering she lookt around--there lay
  A group of warriors in the sun,
Resting their limbs, as for that day
  Their ministry of death were done.
Some gazing on the drowsy sea
Lost in unconscious revery;
And some who seemed but ill to brook
That sluggish calm with many a look
To the slack sail impatient cast,
As loose it bagged around the mast.

Blest ALLA! who shall save her now?
  There's not in all that warrior band
One Arab sword, one turbaned brow
  From her own Faithful Moslem land.
Their garb--the leathern belt that wraps
  Each yellow vest[252]--that rebel hue--
The Tartar fleece upon their caps[253]--
  Yes--yes--her fears are all too true,
And Heaven hath in this dreadful hour
Abandoned her to HAFED'S power;--
HAFED, the Gheber!--at the thought
  Her very heart's blood chills within;
He whom her soul was hourly taught
  To loathe as some foul fiend of sin,
Some minister whom Hell had sent
To spread its blast where'er he went
And fling as o'er our earth he trod
His shadow betwixt man and God!
And she is now his captive,--thrown
In his fierce hands, alive, alone;
His the infuriate band she sees,
All infidels--all enemies!
What was the daring hope that then
Crost her like lightning, as again
With boldness that despair had lent
  She darted tho' that armed crowd
A look so searching, so intent,
  That even the sternest warrior bowed
Abasht, when he her glances caught,
As if he guessed whose form they sought.
But no--she sees him not--'tis gone,
The vision that before her shone
Thro' all the maze of blood and storm,
Is fled--'twas but a phantom form--
One of those passing, rainbow dreams,
Half light, half shade, which Fancy's beams
Paint on the fleeting mists that roll
In trance or slumber round the soul.

But now the bark with livelier bound
  Scales the blue wave--the crew's in motion.
The oars are out and with light sound
  Break the bright mirror of the ocean,
Scattering its brilliant fragments round.
And now she sees--with horror sees,
  Their course is toward that mountain-hold,--
Those towers that make her life-blood freeze,
Where MECCA'S godless enemies
  Lie like beleaguered scorpions rolled
  In their last deadly, venomous fold!
Amid the illumined land and flood
Sunless that mighty mountain stood;
Save where above its awful head,
There shone a flaming cloud, blood-red,
As 'twere the flag of destiny
Hung out to mark where death would be!

Had her bewildered mind the power
Of thought in this terrific hour,
She well might marvel where or how
Man's foot could scale that mountain's brow,
Since ne'er had Arab heard or known
Of path but thro' the glen alone.--
But every thought was lost in fear,
When, as their bounding bark drew near
The craggy base, she felt the waves
Hurry them toward those dismal caves
That from the Deep in windings pass
Beneath that Mount's volcanic mass;--
And loud a voice on deck commands
To lower the mast and light the brands!--
Instantly o'er the dashing tide
Within a cavern's mouth they glide,
Gloomy as that eternal Porch
  Thro' which departed spirits go:--
Not even the flare of brand and torch
  Its flickering light could further throw
  Than the thick flood that boiled below.
Silent they floated--as if each
Sat breathless, and too awed for speech
In that dark chasm where even sound
Seemed dark,--so sullenly around
The goblin echoes of the cave
Muttered it o'er the long black wave
As 'twere some secret of the grave!

But soft--they pause--the current turns
  Beneath them from its onward track;--
Some mighty, unseen barrier spurns
  The vexed tide all foaming back,
And scarce the oar's redoubled force
Can stem the eddy's whirling course;
When, hark!--some desperate foot has sprung
Among the rocks--the chain is flung--
The oars are up--the grapple clings,
And the tost bark in moorings swings.
Just then, a day-beam thro' the shade
Broke tremulous--but ere the maid
Can see from whence the brightness steals,
Upon her brow she shuddering feels
A viewless hand that promptly ties
A bandage round her burning eyes;
While the rude litter where she lies,
Uplifted by the warrior throng,
O'er the steep rocks is borne along.

Blest power of sunshine!--genial Day,
What balm, what life is in thy ray!
To feel thee is such real bliss,
That had the world no joy but this
To sit in sunshine calm and sweet.--
It were a world too exquisite
For man to leave it for the gloom,
The deep, cold shadow of the tomb.
Even HINDA, tho' she saw not where
  Or whither wound the perilous road,
Yet knew by that awakening air,
  Which suddenly around her glowed,
That they had risen from the darkness there,
And breathed the sunny world again!

But soon this balmy freshness fled--
For now the steepy labyrinth led
Thro' damp and gloom--mid crash of boughs,
And fall of loosened crags that rouse
The leopard from his hungry sleep,
  Who starting thinks each crag a prey,
And long is heard from steep to steep
  Chasing them down their thundering way!
The jackal's cry--the distant moan
Of the hyena, fierce and lone--
And that eternal saddening sound
  Of torrents in the glen beneath,
As 'twere the ever-dark Profound
  That rolls beneath the Bridge of Death!
All, all is fearful--even to see,
  To gaze on those terrific things
She now but blindly hears, would be
  Relief to her imaginings;
Since never yet was shape so dread,
  But Fancy thus in darkness thrown
And by such sounds of horror fed
  Could frame more dreadful of her own.

But does she dream? has Fear again
Perplext the workings of her brain,
Or did a voice, all music, then
Come from the gloom, low whispering near--
"Tremble not, love, thy Gheber's here?"
She _does_ not dream--all sense, all ear,
She drinks the words, "Thy Gheber's here."
'Twas his own voice--she could not err--
  Throughout the breathing world's extent
There was but _one_ such voice for her,
  So kind, so soft, so eloquent!
Oh, sooner shall the rose of May
  Mistake her own sweet nightingale,
And to some meaner minstrel's lay
  Open her bosom's glowing veil,[254]
Than Love shall ever doubt a tone,
A breath of the beloved one!

Though blest mid all her ills to think
  She has that one beloved near,
Whose smile tho' met on ruin's brink
  Hath power to make even ruin dear,--
Yet soon this gleam of rapture crost
By fears for him is chilled and lost.
How shall the ruthless HAFED brook
That one of Gheber blood should look,
With aught but curses in his eye,
On her--a maid of ARABY--
A Moslem maid--the child of him,
  Whose bloody banners' dire success
Hath left their altars cold and dim,
  And their fair land a wilderness!
And worse than all that night of blood
  Which comes so fast--Oh! who shall stay
The sword, that once hath tasted food
  Of Persian hearts or turn its way?
What arm shall then the victim cover,
Or from her father shield her lover?

"Save him, my God!" she inly cries--
"Save him this night--and if thine eyes
  "Have ever welcomed with delight
"The sinner's tears, the sacrifice
  "Of sinners' hearts--guard him this night,
"And here before thy throne I swear
"From my heart's inmost core to tear
  "Love, hope, remembrance, tho' they be
"Linkt with each quivering life-string there,
  "And give it bleeding all to Thee!
"Let him but live,--the burning tear,
"The sighs, so sinful, yet so dear,
"Which have been all too much his own,
"Shall from this hour be Heaven's alone.
"Youth past in penitence and age
"In long and painful pilgrimage
"Shall leave no traces of the flame
"That wastes me now--nor shall his name
"E'er bless my lips but when I pray
"For his dear spirit, that away
"Casting from its angelic ray
"The eclipse of earth, he too may shine
"Redeemed, all glorious and all Thine!
"Think--think what victory to win
"One radiant soul like his from sin,
"One wandering star of virtue back
"To its own native, heavenward track!
"Let him but live, and both are Thine,
  "Together Thine--for blest or crost,
"Living or dead, his doom is mine,
  "And if _he_ perish, both are lost!"


The next evening LALLA ROOKH was entreated by her Ladies to continue the
relation of her wonderful dream; but the fearful interest that hung round
the fate of HINDA and her lover had completely removed every trace of it
from her mind;--much to the disappointment of a fair seer or two in her
train, who prided themselves on their skill in interpreting visions, and
who had already remarked, as an unlucky omen, that the Princess, on the
very morning after the dream, had worn a silk dyed with the blossoms of
the sorrowful tree, Nilica.[255]

FADLADEEN, whose indignation had more than once broken out during the
recital of some parts of this heterodox poem, seemed at length to have
made up his mind to the infliction; and took his seat this evening with
all the patience of a martyr while the Poet resumed his profane and
seditious story as follows:--


To tearless eyes and hearts at ease
The leafy shores and sun-bright seas
That lay beneath that mountain's height
Had been a fair enchanting sight.
'Twas one of those ambrosial eyes
A day of storm so often leaves
At its calm setting--when the West
Opens her golden bowers of rest,
And a moist radiance from the skies
Shoots trembling down, as from the eyes
Of some meek penitent whose last
Bright hours atone for dark ones past,
And whose sweet tears o'er wrong forgiven
Shine as they fall with light from heaven!

'Twas stillness all--the winds that late
Had rushed through KERMAN'S almond groves,
And shaken from her bowers of date
That cooling feast the traveller loves.[256]
Now lulled to languor scarcely curl
  The Green Sea wave whose waters gleam
Limpid as if her mines of pearl
  Were melted all to form the stream:
And her fair islets small and bright
  With their green shores reflected there
Look like those PERI isles of light
  That hang by spell-work in the air

But vainly did those glories burst
On HINDA'S dazzled eyes, when first
The bandage from her brow was taken,
And, pale and awed as those who waken
In their dark tombs--when, scowling near,
The Searchers of the Grave[257] appear.--
She shuddering turned to read her fate
  In the fierce eyes that flasht around;
And saw those towers all desolate,
  That o'er her head terrific frowned,
As if defying even the smile
Of that soft heaven to gild their pile.
In vain with mingled hope and fear,
She looks for him whose voice so dear
Had come, like music, to her ear,--
Strange, mocking dream! again 'tis fled.
And oh, the shoots, the pangs of dread
That thro' her inmost bosom run,
  When voices from without proclaim
"HAFED, the Chief"--and, one by one,
  The warriors shout that fearful name!
He comes--the rock resounds his tread--
How shall she dare to lift her head
Or meet those eyes whose scorching glare
Not YEMEN'S boldest sons can bear?
In whose red beam, the Moslem tells,
Such rank and deadly lustre dwells
As in those hellish fires that light
The mandrake's charnel leaves at night.[258]
How shall she bear that voice's tone,
At whose loud battle-cry alone
Whole squadrons oft in panic ran,
Scattered like some vast caravan,
When stretched at evening round the well
They hear the thirsting tiger's yell.

Breathless she stands with eyes cast down
Shrinking beneath the fiery frown
Which, fancy tells her, from that brow
Is flashing o'er her fiercely now:
And shuddering as she hears the tread
  Of his retiring warrior band.--
Never was pause full of dread;
  Till HAFED with a trembling hand
Took hers and leaning o'er her said,
"HINDA;"--that word was all he spoke.
And 'twas enough--the shriek that broke
  From her full bosom told the rest.--
Panting with terror, joy, surprise,
The maid but lifts her wandering eyes,
  To hide them on her Gheber's breast!
'Tis he, 'tis he--the man of blood,
The fellest of the Fire-fiend's brood,
HAFED, the demon of the fight,
Whose voice unnerves, whose glances blight,--
Is her own loved Gheber, mild
And glorious as when first he smiled
In her lone tower and left such beams
Of his pure eye to light her dreams,
That she believed her bower had given
Rest to some wanderer from heaven!

Moments there are, and this was one,
Snatched like a minute's gleam of sun
Amid the black Simoom's eclipse--
  Or like those verdant spots that bloom
Around the crater's burning lips.
  Sweetening the very edge of doom!
The past, the future--all that Fate
  Can bring of dark or desperate
Around such hours but makes them cast
Intenser radiance while they last!
Even he, this youth--tho' dimmed and gone
Each Star of Hope that cheered him on--
His glories lost--his cause betrayed--
IRAN, his dear-loved country, made
A land of carcasses and slaves,
One dreary waste of chains and graves!
Himself but lingering, dead at heart,
  To see the last, long struggling breath
Of Liberty's great soul depart,
  Then lay him down and share her death--
Even he so sunk in wretchedness
  With doom still darker gathering o'er him,
Yet, in this moment's pure caress,
  In the mild eyes that shone before him,
Beaming that blest assurance worth
All other transports known on earth.
That he was loved-well, warmly loved--
Oh! in this precious hour he proved
How deep, how thorough-felt the glow
Of rapture kindling out of woe;--
How exquisite one single drop
Of bliss thus sparkling to the top
Of misery's cup--how keenly quaft,
Tho' death must follow on the draught!

She too while gazing on those eyes
  That sink into her soul so deep,
Forgets all fears, all miseries,
  Or feels them like the wretch in sleep,
Whom fancy cheats into a smile.
  Who dreams of joy and sobs the while!
The mighty Ruins where they stood
  Upon the mount's high, rocky verge
Lay open towards the ocean flood,
  Where lightly o'er the illumined surge
Many a fair bark that, all the day,
Had lurkt in sheltering creek or bay
Now bounded on and gave their sails,
Yet dripping to the evening gales;
Like eagles when the storm is done,
Spreading their wet wings in the sun.
The beauteous clouds, tho' daylight's Star
Had sunk behind the hills of LAR,
Were still with lingering glories bright.--
As if to grace the gorgeous West
  The Spirit of departing Light
That eve had left his sunny vest
  Behind him ere he winged his flight.
Never was scene so formed for love!
Beneath them waves of crystal move
In silent swell--Heaven glows above
And their pure hearts, to transport given,
Swell like the wave and glow like heaven.

But ah! too soon that dream is past--
  Again, again her fear returns;--
Night, dreadful night, is gathering fast,
  More faintly the horizon burns,
And every rosy tint that lay
On the smooth sea hath died away
Hastily to the darkening skies
A glance she casts--then wildly cries
"_At night_, he said--and look, 'tis near--
  "Fly, fly--if yet thou lovest me, fly--
"Soon will his murderous band be here.
  "And I shall see thee bleed and die.--
"Hush! heardest thou not the tramp of men
"Sounding from yonder fearful glen?--
"Perhaps, even now they climb the wood--
  "Fly, fly--tho' still the West is bright,
"He'll come--oh! yes--he wants thy blood--
  "I know him--he'll not wait for night!"

In terrors even to agony
  She clings around the wondering Chief;--
  "Alas, poor wildered maid! to me
  "Thou owest this raving trance of grief.
"Lost as I am, naught ever grew
"Beneath my shade but perisht too--
"My doom is like the Dead Sea air,
"And nothing lives that enters there!
"Why were our barks together driven
"Beneath this morning's furious heaven?
"Why when I saw the prize that chance
  "Had thrown into my desperate arms,--
"When casting but a single glance
"Upon thy pale and prostrate charms,
"I vowed (tho' watching viewless o'er
  "Thy safety thro' that hour's alarms)
"To meet the unmanning sight no more--
"Why have I broke that heart-wrung vow?
"Why weakly, madly met thee now?
"Start not--that noise is but the shock
  "Of torrents thro' yon valley hurled--
"Dread nothing here--upon this rock
  "We stand above the jarring world,
"Alike beyond its hope--its dread--
"In gloomy safety like the Dead!
"Or could even earth and hell unite
"In league to storm this Sacred Height,
"Fear nothing thou--myself, tonight,
"And each o'erlooking star that dwells
"Near God will be thy sentinels;--
"And ere to-morrow's dawn shall glow,
"Back to thy sire"--
    "To-morrow!--no"--
The maiden screamed--"Thou'lt never see
"To-morrow's sun--death, death will be
"The night-cry thro' each reeking tower,
"Unless we fly, ay, fly this hour!
"Thou art betrayed--some wretch who knew
"That dreadful glen's mysterious clew-
"Nay, doubt not--by yon stars, 'tis true--
"Hath sold thee to my vengeful sire;
"This morning, with that smile so dire
"He wears in joy he told me all
"And stampt in triumph thro' our hall,
"As tho' thy heart already beat
"Its last life-throb beneath his feet!
"Good Heaven, how little dreamed I then
  "His victim was my own loved youth!--
"Fly--send--let some one watch the glen--
  "By all my hopes of heaven 'tis truth!"

Oh! colder than the wind that freezes
  Founts that but now in sunshine played,
Is that congealing pang which seizes
  The trusting bosom, when betrayed.
He felt it--deeply felt--and stood,
As if the tale had frozen his blood,
  So mazed and motionless was he;--
Like one whom sudden spells enchant,
Or some mute, marble habitant
  Of the still Halls of ISHMONIE![259]
But soon the painful chill was o'er,
And his great soul herself once more
Lookt from his brow in all the rays
Of her best, happiest, grandest days.
Never in moment most elate
  Did that high spirit loftier rise:--
While bright, serene, determinate,
  His looks are lifted to the skies,
As if the signal lights of Fate
  Were shining in those awful eyes!
'Tis come--his hour of martyrdom
In IRAN'S sacred cause is come;
And tho' his life hath past away
Like lightning on a stormy day,
Yet shall his death-hour leave a track
  Of glory permanent and bright
To which the brave of after-times,
The suffering brave, shall long look back
  With proud regret,--and by its light
  Watch thro' the hours of slavery's night
For vengeance on the oppressor's crimes.
This rock, his monument aloft,
  Shall speak the tale to many an age;
And hither bards and heroes oft
  Shall come in secret pilgrimage,
And bring their warrior sons and tell
The wondering boys where HAFED fell;
And swear them on those lone remains
Of their lost country's ancient fanes,
Never--while breath of life shall live
Within them--never to forgive
The accursed race whose ruthless chain
Hath left on IRAN'S neck a stain
Blood, blood alone can cleanse again!

Such are the swelling thoughts that now
Enthrone themselves on HAFED'S brow;
And ne'er did Saint of ISSA [260] gaze
  On the red wreath for martyrs twined.
More proudly than the youth surveys
  That pile which thro' the gloom behind,
Half lighted by the altar's fire,
Glimmers--his destined funeral pyre!
Heaped by his own, his comrades hands,
  Of every wood of odorous breath.
There, by the Fire-God's shrine it stands,
  Ready to fold in radiant death
The few still left of those who swore
To perish there when hope was o'er--
The few to whom that couch of flame,
Which rescues them from bonds and shame,
Is sweet and welcome as the bed
For their own infant Prophet spread,
When pitying Heaven to roses turned
The death-flames that beneath him burned![261]

  With watchfulness the maid attends
His rapid glance where'er it bends--
Why shoot his eyes such awful beams?
What plans he now? what thinks or dreams?
Alas! why stands he musing here,
When every moment teems with fear?
"HAFED, my own beloved Lord,"
She kneeling cries--"first, last adored!
"If in that soul thou'st ever felt
  "Half what thy lips impassioned swore,
"Here on my knees that never knelt
  "To any but their God before,
"I pray thee, as thou lovest me, fly--
"Now, now--ere yet their blades are nigh.
"Oh haste--the bark that bore me hither
  "Can waft us o'er yon darkening sea
"East--west--alas, I care not whither,
  "So thou art safe, and I with thee!
"Go where we will, this hand in thine,
  "Those eyes before me smiling thus,
"Thro' good and ill, thro' storm and shine,
  "The world's a world of love for us!
"On some calm, blessed shore we'll dwell,
"Where 'tis no crime to love too well;
"Where thus to worship tenderly
"An erring child of light like thee
"Will not be sin--or if it be
"Where we may weep our faults away,
"Together kneeling, night and day,
"Thou, for _my_ sake, at ALLA'S shrine,
"And I--at _any_ God's, for thine!"

Wildly these passionate words she spoke--
  Then hung her head and wept for shame;
Sobbing as if a heart-string broke
  With every deep-heaved sob that came,
While he, young, warm--oh! wonder not
  If, for a moment, pride and fame;
  His oath--his cause--that shrine of flame,
And IRAN'S self are all forgot
For her, whom at his feet he sees
Kneeling in speechless agonies.
No, blame him not if Hope awhile
Dawned in his soul and threw her smile
O'er hours to come--o'er days and nights,
Winged with those precious, pure delights
Which she who bends all beauteous there
Was born to kindle and to share.
A tear or two which as he bowed
  To raise the suppliant, trembling stole,
First warned him of this dangerous cloud
  Of softness passing o'er his soul.
Starting he brusht the drops away
Unworthy o'er that cheek to stray;--
Like one who on the morn of fight
Shakes from his sword the dews of night,
That had but dimmed not stained its light.

Yet tho' subdued the unnerving thrill,
Its warmth, its weakness lingered still
  So touching in each look and tone,
That the fond, fearing, hoping maid
Half counted on the flight she prayed,
  Half thought the hero's soul was grown
  As soft, as yielding as her own,
And smiled and blest him while he said,--
"Yes--if there be some happier sphere
"Where fadeless truth like ours is dear.--
"If there be any land of rest
  "For those who love and ne'er forget,
"Oh! comfort thee--for safe and blest
  "We'll meet in that calm region yet!"

  Scarce had she time to ask her heart
If good or ill these words impart,
When the roused youth impatient flew
To the tower-wall, where high in view
A ponderous sea-horn[262] hung, and blew
A signal deep and dread as those
The storm-fiend at his rising blows.--
Full well his Chieftains, sworn and true
Thro' life and death, that signal knew;
For 'twas the appointed warning-blast,
The alarm to tell when hope was past
And the tremendous death-die cast!
And there upon the mouldering tower
Hath hung this sea-horn many an hour,
Ready to sound o'er land and sea
That dirge-note of the brave and free.

They came--his Chieftains at the call
Came slowly round and with them all--
Alas, how few!--the worn remains
Of those who late o'er KERMAN'S plains
When gayly prancing to the clash
  Of Moorish zel and tymbalon
Catching new hope from every flash
  Of their long lances in the sun,
And as their coursers charged the wind
And the white ox-tails streamed behind,[263]
Looking as if the steeds they rode
Were winged and every Chief a God!
How fallen, how altered now! how wan
Each scarred and faded visage shone,
As round the burning shrine they came;--
  How deadly was the glare it cast,
As mute they paused before the flame
  To light their torches as they past!
'Twas silence all--the youth hath planned
The duties of his soldier-band;
And each determined brow declares
His faithful Chieftains well know theirs.
But minutes speed--night gems the skies--
And oh, how soon, ye blessed eyes
That look from heaven ye may behold
Sights that will turn your star-fires cold!
Breathless with awe, impatience, hope,
The maiden sees the veteran group
Her litter silently prepare,
  And lay it at her trembling feet;--
And now the youth with gentle care,
  Hath placed her in the sheltered seat
And prest her hand--that lingering press
  Of hands that for the last time sever;
Of hearts whose pulse of happiness
  When that hold breaks is dead for ever.
And yet to _her_ this sad caress
  Gives hope--so fondly hope can err!
'Twas joy, she thought, joy's mute excess--
  Their happy flight's dear harbinger;
'Twas warmth--assurance--tenderness--
  'Twas any thing but leaving her.

"Haste, haste!" she cried, "the clouds grow dark,
"But still, ere night, we'll reach the bark;
"And by to-morrow's dawn--oh bliss!
  "With thee upon the sun-bright deep,
"Far off, I'll but remember this,
  "As some dark vanisht dream of sleep;
"And thou"--but ah!--he answers not--
  Good Heaven!--and does she go alone?
She now has reached that dismal spot,
  Where some hours since his voice's tone
Had come to soothe her fears and ills,
Sweet as the angel ISRAFIL'S,[264]
When every leaf on Eden's tree
Is trembling to his minstrelsy--
Yet now--oh, now, he is not nigh.--
  "HAFED! my HAFED!--if it be
"Thy will, thy doom this night to die
  "Let me but stay to die with thee
"And I will bless thy loved name,
"Till the last life-breath leave this frame.
"Oh! let our lips, our cheeks be laid
"But near each other while they fade;
"Let us but mix our parting breaths,
"And I can die ten thousand deaths!
"You too, who hurry me away
"So cruelly, one moment stay--
  "Oh! stay--one moment is not much--
"He yet may come--for _him_ I pray--
"HAFED! dear HAFED!"--all the way
  In wild lamentings that would touch
A heart of stone she shrieked his name
To the dark woods--no HAFED came:--
No--hapless pair--you've lookt your last:--
  Your hearts should both have broken then:--
The dream is o'er--your doom is cast--
  You'll never meet on earth again!

Alas for him who hears her cries!
  Still half-way down the steep he stands,
Watching with fixt and feverish eyes
  The glimmer of those burning brands
That down the rocks with mournful ray,
Light all he loves on earth away!
Hopeless as they who far at sea
  By the cold moon have just consigned
The corse of one loved tenderly
  To the bleak flood they leave behind,
And on the deck still lingering stay,
And long look back with sad delay
To watch the moonlight on the wave
That ripples o'er that cheerless grave.

  But see--he starts--what heard he then?
That dreadful shout!--across the glen
From the land-side it comes and loud
Rings thro' the chasm, as if the crowd
Of fearful things that haunt that dell
Its Ghouls and Divs and shapes of hell,
And all in one dread howl broke out,
So loud, so terrible that shout!
"They come--the Moslems come!"--he cries,
His proud soul mounting to his eyes,--
"Now, Spirits of the Brave, who roam
"Enfranchised thro' yon starry dome,
"Rejoice--for souls of kindred fire
"Are on the wing to join your choir!"
He said--and, light as bridegrooms bound
  To their young loves, reclined the steep
And gained the Shrine--his Chiefs stood round--
  Their swords, as with instinctive leap,
Together at that cry accurst
Had from their sheaths like sunbeams burst.
And hark!--again--again it rings;
Near and more near its echoings
Peal thro' the chasm--oh! who that then
Had seen those listening warrior-men,
With their swords graspt, their eyes of flame
Turned on their Chief--could doubt the shame,
The indignant shame with which they thrill
To hear those shouts and yet stand still?

He read their thoughts--they were his own--
  "What! while our arms can wield these blades,
"Shall we die tamely? die alone?
  "Without one victim to our shades,
"One Moslem heart, where buried deep
  "The sabre from its toil may sleep?
"No--God of IRAN'S burning skies!
"Thou scornest the inglorious sacrifice.
"No--tho' of all earth's hope bereft,
"Life, swords, and vengeance still are left.
"We'll make yon valley's reeking caves
  "Live in the awe-struck minds of men
"Till tyrants shudder, when their slaves
  "Tell of the Gheber's bloody glen,
"Follow, brave hearts!--this pile remains
"Our refuge still from life and chains;
"But his the best, the holiest bed,
"Who sinks entombed in Moslem dead!"

  Down the precipitous rocks they sprung,
While vigor more than human strung
Each arm and heart.--The exulting foe
Still thro' the dark defiles below,
Trackt by his torches' lurid fire,
  Wound slow, as thro' GOLCONDA'S vale
The mighty serpent in his ire
  Glides on with glittering, deadly trail.
No torch the Ghebers need--so well
They know each mystery of the dell,
So oft have in their wanderings
Crost the wild race that round them dwell,
  The very tigers from their delves
Look out and let them pass as things
  Untamed and fearless like themselves!

  There was a deep ravine that lay
Yet darkling in the Moslem's way;
Fit spot to make invaders rue
The many fallen before the few.
The torrents from that morning's sky
Had filled the narrow chasm breast-high,
And on each side aloft and wild
Huge cliffs and toppling crags were piled,--
The guards with which young Freedom lines
The pathways to her mountain-shrines,
Here at this pass the scanty band;
Of IRAN'S last avengers stand;
Here wait in silence like the dead
And listen for the Moslem's tread
So anxiously the carrion-bird
Above them flaps his wing unheard!

  They come--that plunge into the water
Gives signal for the work of slaughter.
Now, Ghebers, now--if e'er your blades
  Had point or prowess prove them now--
Woe to the file that foremost wades!
  They come--a falchion greets each brow,
And as they tumble trunk on trunk
Beneath the gory waters sunk,
Still o'er their drowning bodies press
New victims quick and numberless;
Till scarce an arm in HAFED'S band,
  So fierce their toil, hath power to stir,
But listless from each crimson hand
  The sword hangs clogged with massacre.
Never was horde of tyrants met
With bloodier welcome--never yet
To patriot vengeance hath the sword
More terrible libations poured!

  All up the dreary, long ravine,
By the red, murky glimmer seen
Of half-quenched brands, that o'er the flood
Lie scattered round and burn in blood,
What ruin glares! what carnage swims!
Heads, blazing turbans, quivering limbs,
Lost swords that dropt from many a hand,
In that thick pool of slaughter stand;--
Wretches who wading, half on fire
  From the tost brands that round them fly,
'Twixt flood and flame in shrieks expire;--
  And some who grasp by those that die
Sink woundless with them, smothered o'er
In their dead brethren's gushing gore!

  But vainly hundreds, thousands bleed,
Still hundreds, thousands more succeed;
Countless as toward some flame at night
The North's dark insects wing their flight
And quench or perish in its light,
To this terrific spot they pour--
Till, bridged with Moslem bodies o'er,
It bears aloft their slippery tread,
And o'er the dying and the dead,
Tremendous causeway! on they pass.
Then, hapless Ghebers, then, alas,
What hope was left for you? for you,
Whose yet warm pile of sacrifice
Is smoking in their vengeful eyes;--
Whose swords how keen, how fierce they knew.
And burned with shame to find how few.

  Crusht down by that vast multitude
Some found their graves where first they stood;
While some with hardier struggle died,
And still fought on by HAFED'S side,
Who fronting to the foe trod back
Towards the high towers his gory track;
And as a lion swept away
  By sudden swell of JORDAN'S pride
From the wild covert where he lay,[265]
  Long battles with the o'erwhelming tide,
So fought he back with fierce delay
And kept both foes and fate at bay.

But whither now? their track is lost,
  Their prey escaped--guide, torches gone--
By torrent-beds and labyrinths crost,
  The scattered crowd rush blindly on--
"Curse on those tardy lights that wind,"
They panting cry, "so far behind;
"Oh, for a bloodhound's precious scent,
"To track the way the Ghebers went!"
Vain wish--confusedly along
They rush more desperate as more wrong:
Till wildered by the far-off lights,
Yet glittering up those gloomy heights,
Their footing mazed and lost they miss,
And down the darkling precipice
Are dasht into the deep abyss;
Or midway hang impaled on rocks,
A banquet yet alive for flocks
Of ravening vultures,--while the dell
Re-echoes with each horrible yell.
Those sounds--the last, to vengeance dear.
That e'er shall ring in HAFED'S ear,--
Now reached him as aloft alone
Upon the steep way breathless thrown,
He lay beside his reeking blade,
  Resigned, as if life's task were o'er,
Its last blood-offering amply paid,
  And IRAN'S self could claim no more.
One only thought, one lingering beam
Now broke across his dizzy dream
Of pain and weariness--'twas she,
  His heart's pure planet shining yet
Above the waste of memory
  When all life's other lights were set.
And never to his mind before
Her image such enchantment wore.
It seemed as if each thought that stained,
  Each fear that chilled their loves was past,
And not one cloud of earth remained
  Between him and her radiance cast;--
As if to charms, before so bright,
  New grace from other worlds was given.
And his soul saw her by the light
  Now breaking o'er itself from heaven!

A voice spoke near him--'twas the tone
Of a loved friend, the only one
Of all his warriors left with life
From that short night's tremendous strife.--
"And must we then, my chief, die here?
"Foes round us and the Shrine so near!"
These words have roused the last remains
  Of life within him:--"What! not yet
"Beyond the reach of Moslem chains!"

  The thought could make even Death forget
His icy bondage:--with a bound
He springs all bleeding from the ground
And grasps his comrade's arm now grown
Even feebler, heavier than his own.
And up the painful pathway leads,
Death gaining on each step he treads.
Speed them, thou God, who heardest their vow!
They mount--they bleed--oh save them now--
The crags are red they've clambered o'er,
The rock-weed's dripping with their gore;--
Thy blade too, HAFED, false at length,
How breaks beneath thy tottering strength!
Haste, haste--the voices of the Foe
Come near and nearer from below--
One effort more--thank Heaven! 'tis past,
They've gained the topmost steep at last.
And now they touch the temple's walls.
  Now HAFED sees the Fire divine--
When, lo!--his weak, worn comrade falls
  Dead on the threshold of the shrine.
"Alas, brave soul, too quickly fled!
  "And must I leave thee withering here,
"The sport of every ruffian's tread,
  "The mark for every coward's spear?
"No, by yon altar's sacred beams!"
He cries and with a strength that seems
Not of this world uplifts the frame
Of the fallen Chief and toward the flame
Bears him along; with death-damp hand
  The corpse upon the pyre he lays,
Then lights the consecrated brand
  And fires the pile whose sudden blaze
Like lightning bursts o'er OMAN'S Sea.--
"Now, Freedom's God! I come to Thee,"
The youth exclaims and with a smile
Of triumph vaulting on the pile,
In that last effort ere the fires
Have harmed one glorious limb expires!

What shriek was that on OMAN'S tide?
  It came from yonder drifting bark,
That just hath caught upon her side
  The death-light--and again is dark.
It is the boat--ah! why delayed?--
That bears the wretched Moslem maid;
Confided to the watchful care
  Of a small veteran band with whom
Their generous Chieftain would not share
  The secret of his final doom,
But hoped when HINDA safe and free
  Was rendered to her father's eyes,
Their pardon full and prompt would be
  The ransom of so dear a prize.--
Unconscious thus of HAFED'S fate,
And proud to guard their beauteous freight,
Scarce had they cleared the surfy waves
That foam around those frightful caves
When the curst war-whoops known so well
Came echoing from the distant dell--
Sudden each oar, upheld and still,
  Hung dripping o'er the vessel's side,
And driving at the current's will,
  They rockt along the whispering tide;
While every eye in mute dismay
  Was toward that fatal mountain turned.
Where the dim altar's quivering ray
  As yet all lone and tranquil burned.

Oh! 'tis not, HINDA, in the power
  Of Fancy's most terrific touch
To paint thy pangs in that dread hour--
  Thy silent agony--'twas such
As those who feel could paint too well,
But none e'er felt and lived to tell!
'Twas not alone the dreary state
Of a lorn spirit crusht by fate,
When tho' no more remains to dread
  The panic chill will not depart;--
When tho' the inmate Hope be dead,
  Her ghost still haunts the mouldering heart;
No--pleasures, hopes, affections gone,
The wretch may bear and yet live on
Like things within the cold rock found
Alive when all's congealed around.
But there's a blank repose in this,
A calm stagnation, that were bliss
To the keen, burning, harrowing pain,
Now felt thro' all thy breast and brain;--
That spasm of terror, mute, intense,
That breathless, agonized suspense
From whose hot throb whose deadly aching,
The heart hath no relief but breaking!

Calm is the wave--heaven's brilliant lights
  Reflected dance beneath the prow;--
Time was when on such lovely nights
  She who is there so desolate now
Could sit all cheerful tho' alone
  And ask no happier joy than seeing
That starlight o'er the waters thrown--
No joy but that to make her blest,
  And the fresh, buoyant sense of Being
Which bounds in youth's yet careless breast,--
Itself a star not borrowing light
But in its own glad essence bright.
How different now!--but, hark! again
The yell of havoc rings--brave men!
In vain with beating hearts ye stand
On the bark's edge--in vain each hand
Half draws the falchion from its sheath;
  All's o'er--in rust your blades may lie:--
He at whose word they've scattered death
  Even now this night himself must die!
Well may ye look to yon dim tower,
  And ask and wondering guess what means
The battle-cry at this dead hour--
  Ah! she could tell you--she who leans
Unheeded there, pale, sunk, aghast,
With brow against the dew-cold mast;--
  Too well she knows--her more than life,
Her soul's first idol and its last
  Lies bleeding in that murderous strife.
But see--what moves upon the height?
Some signal!--'tis a torch's light
  What bodes its solitary glare?
In gasping silence toward the Shrine
All eyes are turned--thine, HINDA, thine
  Fix their last fading life-beams there.
'Twas but a moment--fierce and high
The death-pile blazed into the sky
And far-away o'er rock and flood
  Its melancholy radiance sent:
While HAFED like a vision stood
Revealed before the burning pyre.
Tall, shadowy, like a Spirit of fire
  Shrined in its own grand element!
"'Tis he!"--the shuddering maid exclaims,--
  But while she speaks he's seen no more;
High burst in air the funeral flames,
  And IRAN'S hopes and hers are o'er!

One wild, heart-broken shriek she gave;
  Then sprung as if to reach that blaze
  Where still she fixt her dying gaze,
And gazing sunk into the wave.--
  Deep, deep,--where never care or pain
  Shall reach her innocent heart again!

       *       *       *       *       *

Farewell--farewell to thee. ARABY'S daughter!
  (Thus warbled a PERI beneath the dark sea,)
No pearl ever lay under OMAN'S green water
  More pure in its shell than thy Spirit in thee.

Oh! fair as the sea-flower close to thee growing,
  How light was thy heart till Love's witchery came,
Like the wind of the south[266] o'er a summer lute blowing,
  And husht all its music and withered its frame!

But long upon ARABY'S green sunny highlands
  Shall maids and their lovers remember the doom
Of her who lies sleeping among the Pearl Islands
  With naught but the sea-star[267] to light up her tomb.

And still when the merry date-season is burning
  And calls to the palm-groves the young and the old,
The happiest there from their pastime returning
  At sunset will weep when thy story is told.

The young village-maid when with flowers she dresses
  Her dark flowing hair for some festival day
Will think of thy fate till neglecting her tresses
  She mournfully turns from the mirror away.

Nor shall IRAN, beloved of her Hero! forget thee--
  Tho' tyrants watch over her tears as they start,
Close, close by the side of that Hero she'll set thee,
  Embalmed in the innermost shrine of her heart.

Farewell--be it ours to embellish thy pillow
  With everything beauteous that grows in the deep;
Each flower of the rock and each gem of the billow
  Shall sweeten thy bed and illumine thy sleep.

Around thee shall glisten the loveliest amber
  That ever the sorrowing sea-bird has wept;[268]
With many a shell in whose hollow-wreathed chamber
  We Peris of Ocean by moonlight have slept.

We'll dive where the gardens of coral lie darkling
  And plant all the rosiest stems at thy head;
We'll seek where the sands of the Caspian[269] are sparkling
  And gather their gold to strew over thy bed.

Farewell--farewell!--Until Pity's sweet fountain
  Is lost in the hearts of the fair and the brave,
They'll weep for the Chieftain who died on that mountain,
  They'll weep for the Maiden who sleeps in this wave.


The singular placidity with which FADLADEEN had listened during the latter
part of this obnoxious story surprised the Princess and FERAMORZ
exceedingly; and even inclined towards him the hearts of these
unsuspicious young persons who little knew the source of a complacency so
marvellous. The truth was he had been organizing for the last few days a
most notable plan of persecution against the poet in consequence of some
passages that had fallen from him on the second evening of recital,--which
appeared to this worthy Chamberlain to contain language and principles for
which nothing short of the summary criticism of the Chabuk[270] would be
advisable. It was his intention therefore immediately on their arrival at
Cashmere to give information to the King of Bucharia of the very dangerous
sentiments of his minstrel; and if unfortunately that monarch did not act
with suitable vigor on the occasion, (that is, if he did not give the
Chabuk to FERAMORZ and a place to FADLADEEN.) there would be an end, he
feared, of all legitimate government in Bucharia. He could not help
however auguring better both for himself and the cause of potentates in
general; and it was the pleasure arising from these mingled anticipations
that diffused such unusual satisfaction through his features and made his
eyes shine out like poppies of the desert over the wide and lifeless
wilderness of that countenance.

Having decided upon the Poet's chastisement in this manner he thought it
but humanity to spare him the minor tortures of criticism. Accordingly
when they assembled the following evening in the pavilion and LALLA ROOKH
was expecting to see all the beauties of her bard melt away one by one in
the acidity of criticism, like pearls in the cup of the Egyptian queen.--
he agreeably disappointed her by merely saying with an ironical smile that
the merits of such a poem deserved to be tried at a much higher tribunal;
and then suddenly passed off into a panegyric upon all Mussulman
sovereigns, more particularly his august and Imperial master, Aurungzebe,
--the wisest and best of the descendants of Timur,--who among other great
things he had done for mankind had given to him, FADLADEEN, the very
profitable posts of Betel-carrier and Taster of Sherbets to the Emperor,
Chief Holder of the Girdle of Beautiful Forms,[271] and Grand Nazir or
Chamberlain of the Haram.

They were now not far from that Forbidden River[272] beyond which no pure
Hindoo can pass, and were reposing for a time in the rich valley of Hussun
Abdaul, which had always been a favorite resting-place of the Emperors in
their annual migrations to Cashmere. Here often had the Light of the
Faith, Jehan-Guire, been known to wander with his beloved and beautiful
Nourmahal, and here would LALLA ROOKH have been happy to remain for ever,
giving up the throne of Bucharia and the world for FERAMORZ and love in
this sweet, lonely valley. But the time was now fast approaching when she
must see him no longer,--or, what was still worse, behold him with eyes
whose every look belonged to another, and there was a melancholy
preciousness in these last moments, which made her heart cling to them as
it would to life. During the latter part of the journey, indeed, she had
sunk into a deep sadness from which nothing but the presence of the young
minstrel could awake her. Like those lamps in tombs which only light up
when the air is admitted, it was only at his approach that her eyes became
smiling and animated. But here in this dear valley every moment appeared
an age of pleasure; she saw him all day and was therefore all day happy,--
resembling, she often thought, that people of Zinge[273] who attribute
the unfading cheerfulness they enjoy to one genial star that rises nightly
over their heads.[274]

The whole party indeed seemed in their liveliest mood during the few days
they passed in this delightful solitude. The young attendants of the
Princess who were here allowed a much freer range than they could safely
be indulged with in a less sequestered place ran wild among the gardens
and bounded through the meadows lightly as young roes over the aromatic
plains of Tibet. While FADLADEEN, in addition to the spiritual comfort
derived by him from a pilgrimage to the tomb of the Saint from whom the
valley is named, had also opportunities of indulging in a small way his
taste for victims by putting to death some hundreds of those unfortunate
little lizards,[275] which all pious Mussulmans make it a point to kill;--
taking for granted that the manner in which the creature hangs its head
is meant as a mimicry of the attitude in which the Faithful say their
prayers.

About two miles from Hussun Abdaul were those Royal Gardens which had
grown beautiful under the care of so many lovely eyes, and were beautiful
still though those eyes could see them no longer. This place, with its
flowers and its holy silence interrupted only by the dipping of the wings
of birds in its marble basins filled with the pure water of those hills,
was to LALLA ROOKH all that her heart could fancy of fragrance, coolness,
and almost heavenly tranquillity. As the Prophet said of Damascus, "it was
too delicious;"[276]--and here in listening to the sweet voice of
FERAMORZ or reading in his eyes what yet he never dared to tell her, the
most exquisite moments of her whole life were passed. One evening when
they had been talking of the Sultana Nourmahal, the Light of the Haram,
[277] who had so often wandered among these flowers, and fed with her own
hands in those marble basins the small shining fishes of which she was so
fond,--the youth in order to delay the moment of separation proposed to
recite a short story or rather rhapsody of which this adored Sultana was
the heroine. It related, he said, to the reconcilement of a sort of
lovers' quarrel which took place between her and the Emperor during a
Feast of Roses at Cashmere; and would remind the Princess of that
difference between Haroun-al-Raschid and his fair mistress Marida, which
was so happily made up by the soft strains of the musician Moussali. As
the story was chiefly to be told in song and FERAMORZ had unluckily
forgotten his own lute in the valley, he borrowed the vina of LALLA
ROOKH'S little Persian slave, and thus began:--


THE LIGHT OF THE HARAM.


Who has not heard of the Vale of CASHMERE,
  With its roses the brightest that earth ever gave,[278]
Its temples and grottos and fountains as clear
  As the love-lighted eyes that hang over their wave?

Oh! to see it at sunset,--when warm o'er the Lake
  Its splendor at parting a summer eve throws,
Like a bride full of blushes when lingering to take
  A last look of her mirror at night ere she goes!--
When the shrines thro' the foliage are gleaming half shown,
And each hallows the hour by some rites of its own.
Here the music of prayer from a minaret swells,
  Here the Magian his urn full of perfume is swinging,
And here at the altar a zone of sweet bells
  Round the waist of some fair Indian dancer is ringing.[279]
Or to see it by moonlight when mellowly shines
The light o'er its palaces, gardens, and shrines,
When the water-falls gleam like a quick fall of stars
And the nightingale's hymn from the Isle of Chenars
Is broken by laughs and light echoes of feet
From the cool, shining walks where the young people meet.--
Or at morn when the magic of daylight awakes
A new wonder each minute as slowly it breaks,
Hills, cupolas, fountains, called forth every one
Out of darkness as if but just born of the Sun.
When the Spirit of Fragrance is up with the day
From his Haram of night-flowers stealing away;
And the wind full of wantonness wooes like a lover
The young aspen-trees,[280]
till they tremble all over.
When the East is as warm as the light of first hopes,
  And day with his banner of radiance unfurled
Shines in thro' the mountainous portal[281] that opes,
  Sublime, from that Valley of bliss to the world!

But never yet by night or day,
In dew of spring or summer's ray,
Did the sweet Valley shine so gay
As now it shines--all love and light,
Visions by day and feasts by night!
A happier smile illumes each brow;
  With quicker spread each heart uncloses,
And all is ecstasy--for now
  The Valley holds its Feast of Roses;[282]
The joyous Time when pleasures pour
Profusely round and in their shower
Hearts open like the Season's Rose,--
  The Floweret of a hundred leaves[283]
Expanding while the dew-fall flows
  And every leaf its balm receives.

'Twas when the hour of evening came
  Upon the Lake, serene and cool,
When day had hid his sultry flame
  Behind the palms of BARAMOULE,
When maids began to lift their heads.
Refresht from their embroidered beds
Where they had slept the sun away,
And waked to moonlight and to play.
All were abroad:--the busiest hive
On BELA'S[284] hills is less alive
When saffron-beds are full in flower,
Than lookt the Valley in that hour.
A thousand restless torches played
Thro' every grove and island shade;
A thousand sparkling lamps were set
On every dome and minaret;
And fields and pathways far and near
Were lighted by a blaze so clear
That you could see in wandering round
The smallest rose-leaf on the ground,
Yet did the maids and matrons leave
Their veils at home, that brilliant eve;
And there were glancing eyes about
And cheeks that would not dare shine out
In open day but thought they might
Look lovely then, because 'twas night.
And all were free and wandering
  And all exclaimed to all they met,
That never did the summer bring
  So gay a Feast of Roses yet;--
The moon had never shed a light
  So clear as that which blest them there;
The roses ne'er shone half so bright,
  Nor they themselves lookt half so fair.

And what a wilderness of flowers!
It seemed as tho' from all the bowers
And fairest fields of all the year,
The mingled spoil were scattered here.
The lake too like a garden breathes
  With the rich buds that o'er it lie,--
As if a shower of fairy wreaths
  Had fallen upon it from the sky!
And then the sounds of joy,--the beat
Of tabors and of dancing feet;--
The minaret-crier's chant of glee
Sung from his lighted gallery,[285]
And answered by a ziraleet
From neighboring Haram, wild and sweet;--
The merry laughter echoing
From gardens where the silken swing[286]
Wafts some delighted girl above
The top leaves of the orange-grove;
Or from those infant groups at play
Among the tents[287] that line the way,
Flinging, unawed by slave or mother,
Handfuls of roses at each other.--
Then the sounds from the Lake,--the low whispering in boats,
  As they shoot thro' the moonlight,--the dipping of oars
And the wild, airy warbling that everywhere floats
  Thro' the groves, round the islands, as if all the shores
Like those of KATHAY uttered music and gave
An answer in song to the kiss on each wave.[288]
But the gentlest of all are those sounds full of feeling
That soft from the lute of some lover are stealing,--
Some lover who knows all the heart-touching power
Of a lute and a sigh in this magical hour.
Oh! best of delights as it everywhere is
To be near the loved _One_,--what a rapture is his
Who in moonlight and music thus sweetly may glide
O'er the Lake of CASHMERE with that _One_ by his side!

If woman can make the worst wilderness dear,
Think, think what a Heaven she must make of CASHMERE!

So felt the magnificent Son of ACBAR,
When from power and pomp and the trophies of war
He flew to that Valley forgetting them all
With the Light of the HARAM, his young NOURMAHAL.
When free and uncrowned as the Conqueror roved
By the banks of that Lake with his only beloved
He saw in the wreaths she would playfully snatch
From the hedges a glory his crown could not match,
And preferred in his heart the least ringlet that curled
Down her exquisite neck to the throne of the world.

  There's a beauty for ever unchangingly bright,
Like the long, sunny lapse of a summer-day's light,
Shining on, shining on, by no shadow made tender
Till Love falls asleep in its sameness of splendor.
This _was_ not the beauty--oh, nothing like this
That to young NOURMAHAL gave such magic of bliss!
But that loveliness ever in motion which plays
Like the light upon autumn's soft shadowy days,
Now here and now there, giving warmth as it flies
From the lip to the cheek, from the cheek to the eyes;
Now melting in mist and now breaking in gleams,
Like the glimpses a saint hath of Heaven in his dreams.
When pensive it seemed as if that very grace,
That charm of all others, was born with her face!
And when angry,--for even in the tranquillest climes
Light breezes will ruffle the blossoms sometimes--
The short, passing anger but seemed to awaken
New beauty like flowers that are sweetest when shaken.
If tenderness touched her, the dark of her eye
At once took a darker, a heavenlier dye,
From the depth of whose shadow like holy revealings
From innermost shrines came the light of her feelings.
Then her mirth--oh! 'twas sportive as ever took wing
From the heart with a burst like the wild-bird in spring;
Illumed by a wit that would fascinate sages,
Yet playful as Peris just loosed from their cages.[289]
While her laugh full of life, without any control
But the sweet one of gracefulness, rung from her soul;
And where it most sparkled no glance could discover,
In lip, cheek, or eyes, for she brightened all over,--
Like any fair lake that the breeze is upon
When it breaks into dimples and, laughs in the sun.
Such, such were the peerless enchantments that gave
NOURMAHAL the proud Lord of the East for her slave:
And tho' bright was his Haram,--a living parterre
Of the flowers[290] of this planet--tho' treasures were there,
For which SOLIMAN'S self might have given all the store
That the navy from OPHIR e'er winged to his shore,
Yet dim before _her_ were the smiles of them all
And the Light of his Haram was young NOURMAHAL!

But where is she now, this night of joy,
When bliss is every heart's employ?--
When all around her is so bright,
So like the visions of a trance,
That one might think, who came by chance
Into the vale this happy night,
He saw that City of Delight[291]
In Fairy-land, whose streets and towers
Are made of gems and light and flowers!
Where is the loved Sultana? where,
When mirth brings out the young and fair,
Does she, the fairest, hide her brow
In melancholy stillness now?

Alas!--how light a cause may move
Dissension between hearts that love!
Hearts that the world in vain had tried
And sorrow but more closely tied;
That stood the storm when waves were rough
Yet in a sunny hour fall off,
Like ships that have gone down at sea
When heaven was all tranquillity!
A something light as air--a look,
  A word unkind or wrongly taken--
Oh! love that tempests never shook,
  A breath, a touch like this hath shaken.

And ruder words will soon rush in
To spread the breach that words begin;
And eyes forget the gentle ray
They wore in courtship's smiling day;
And voices lose the tone that shed
A tenderness round all they said;
Till fast declining one by one
The sweetnesses of love are gone,
And hearts so lately mingled seem
Like broken clouds,--or like the stream
That smiling left the mountain's brow
  As tho' its waters ne'er could sever,
Yet ere it reach the plain below,
  Breaks into floods that part for ever.

Oh, you that have the charge of Love,
  Keep him in rosy bondage bound,
As in the Fields of Bliss above
  He sits with flowerets fettered round;--
Loose not a tie that round him clings.
Nor ever let him use his wings;
For even an hour, a minute's flight
Will rob the plumes of half their light.
Like that celestial bird whose nest
  Is found beneath far Eastern skies,
Whose wings tho' radiant when at rest
  Lose all their glory when he flies![292]

Some difference of this dangerous kind,--
By which, tho' light, the links that bind
The fondest hearts may soon be riven;
Some shadow in Love's summer heaven,
Which, tho' a fleecy speck at first
May yet in awful thunder burst;--
Such cloud it is that now hangs over
The heart of the Imperial Lover,
And far hath banisht from his sight
His NOURMAHAL, his Haram's Light!
Hence is it on this happy night
When Pleasure thro' the fields and groves
Has let loose all her world of loves
And every heart has found its own
He wanders joyless and alone
And weary as that bird of Thrace
Whose pinion knows no resting place.[293]

In vain the loveliest cheeks and eyes
This Eden of the Earth supplies
  Come crowding round--the cheeks are pale,
The eyes are dim:--tho' rich the spot
With every flower this earth has got
  What is it to the nightingale
If there his darling rose is not?[294]
In vain the Valley's smiling throng
Worship him as he moves along;
He heeds them not--one smile of hers
Is worth a world of worshippers.
They but the Star's adorers are,
She is the Heaven that lights the Star!

Hence is it too that NOURMAHAL,
Amid the luxuries of this hour,
Far from the joyous festival
Sits in her own sequestered bower,
With no one near to soothe or aid,
But that inspired and wondrous maid,
NAMOUNA, the Enchantress;--one
O'er whom his race the golden sun
For unremembered years has run,
Yet never saw her blooming brow
Younger or fairer than 'tis now.
Nay, rather,--as the west wind's sigh
Freshens the flower it passes by,--
Time's wing but seemed in stealing o'er
To leave her lovelier than before.
Yet on her smiles a sadness hung,
And when as oft she spoke or sung
Of other worlds there came a light
From her dark eyes so strangely bright
That all believed nor man nor earth
Were conscious of NAMOUNA'S birth!
All spells and talismans she knew,
From the great Mantra,[295] which around
The Air's sublimer Spirits drew,
To the gold gems[296] of AFRIC, bound
Upon the wandering Arab's arm
To keep him from the Siltim's[297] harm.
And she had pledged her powerful art,--
Pledged it with all the zeal and heart
Of one who knew tho' high her sphere,
What 'twas to lose a love so dear,--
To find some spell that should recall
Her Selim's[298] smile to NOURMAHAL!

  'Twas midnight--thro' the lattice wreathed
With woodbine many a perfume breathed
From plants that wake when others sleep.
From timid jasmine buds that keep
Their odor to themselves all day
But when the sunlight dies away
Let the delicious secret out
To every breeze that roams about;--
When thus NAMOUNA:--"'Tis the hour
"That scatters spells on herb and flower,
"And garlands might be gathered now,
"That twined around the sleeper's brow
"Would make him dream of such delights,
"Such miracles and dazzling sights
"As Genii of the Sun behold
"At evening from their tents of gold
"Upon the horizon--where they play
"Till twilight comes and ray by ray
"Their sunny mansions melt away.
"Now too a chaplet might be wreathed
"Of buds o'er which the moon has breathed,
"Which worn by her whose love has strayed
  "Might bring some Peri from the skies,
"Some sprite, whose very soul is made
  "Of flowerets' breaths and lovers' sighs,
"And who might tell"--
    "For me, for me,"
Cried NOURMAHAL impatiently,--
"Oh! twine that wreath for me to-night."
Then rapidly with foot as light
As the young musk-roe's out she flew
To cull each shining leaf that grew
Beneath the moonlight's hallowing beams
For this enchanted Wreath of Dreams.
Anemones and Seas of Gold,[299]
  And new-blown lilies of the river,
And those sweet flowerets that unfold
  Their buds on CAMADEVA'S quiver;[300]--
The tuberose, with her silvery light,
  That in the Gardens of Malay
Is called the Mistress of the Night,[301]
So like a bride, scented and bright,
  She comes out when the sun's away:--
Amaranths such as crown the maids
That wander thro' ZAMARA'S shades;[302]--
And the white moon-flower as it shows,
On SERENDIB'S high crags to those
Who near the isle at evening sail,
Scenting her clove-trees in the gale;
In short all flowerets and all plants,
  From the divine Amrita tree[303]
That blesses heaven's habitants
  With fruits of immortality,
Down to the basil tuft[304] that waves
Its fragrant blossom over graves,
  And to the humble rosemary
Whose sweets so thanklessly are shed
To scent the desert[305]and the dead:--
All in that garden bloom and all
Are gathered by young NOURMAHAL,
Who heaps her baskets with the flowers
  And leaves till they can hold no more;
Then to NAMOUNA flies and showers
  Upon her lap the shining store.
With what delight the Enchantress views
So many buds bathed with the dews
And beams of that blest hour!--her glance
  Spoke something past all mortal pleasures,
As in a kind of holy trance
  She hung above those fragrant treasures,
Bending to drink their balmy airs,
As if she mixt her soul with theirs.
And 'twas indeed the perfume shed
From flowers and scented flame that fed
Her charmed life--for none had e'er
Beheld her taste of mortal fare,
Nor ever in aught earthly dip,
But the morn's dew, her roseate lip.
Filled with the cool, inspiring smell,
The Enchantress now begins her spell,
Thus singing as she winds and weaves
In mystic form the glittering leaves:--

I know where the winged visions dwell
  That around the night-bed play;
I know each herb and floweret's bell,
  Where they hide their wings by day.
      Then hasten we, maid,
      To twine our braid,
To-morrow the dreams and flowers will fade.

The image of love that nightly flies
  To visit the bashful maid,
Steals from the jasmine flower that sighs
  Its soul like her in the shade.
The dream of a future, happier hour
  That alights on misery's brow,
Springs out of the silvery almond-flower
  That blooms on a leafless bough.[306]
      Then hasten we, maid,
      To twine our braid,
To-morrow the dreams and flowers will fade.

The visions that oft to worldly eyes
  The glitter of mines unfold
Inhabit the mountain-herb[307] that dyes
  The tooth of the fawn like gold.
The phantom shapes--oh touch not them--
  That appal the murderer's sight,
Lurk in the fleshly mandrake's stem,
  That shrieks when pluckt at night!
      Then hasten we, maid,
      To twine our braid,
To-morrow the dreams and flowers will fade.

The dream of the injured, patient mind
  That smiles at the wrongs of men
Is found in the bruised and wounded rind
  Of the cinnamon, sweetest then.
      Then hasten we, maid,
      To twine our braid,
To-morrow the dreams and flowers will fade.

No sooner was the flowery crown
Placed on her head than sleep came down,
Gently as nights of summer fall,
Upon the lids of NOURMAHAL;--
And suddenly a tuneful breeze
As full of small, rich harmonies
As ever wind that o'er the tents
Of AZAB[308] blew was full of scents,
Steals on her ear and floats and swells
  Like the first air of morning creeping
Into those wreathy, Red-Sea shells
  Where Love himself of old lay sleeping;[309]
And now a Spirit formed, 'twould seem,
  Of music and of light,--so fair,
So brilliantly his features beam,
  And such a sound is in the air
Of sweetness when he waves his wings,--
Hovers around her and thus sings:

From CHINDARA'S[310] warbling fount I come,
  Called by that moonlight garland's spell;
From CHINDARA'S fount, my fairy home,
  Wherein music, morn and night, I dwell.
Where lutes in the air are heard about
  And voices are singing the whole day long,
And every sigh the heart breathes out
  Is turned, as it leaves the lips, to song!
    Hither I come
    From my fairy home,
  And if there's a magic in Music's strain
    I swear by the breath
    Of that moonlight wreath
  Thy Lover shall sigh at thy feet again.

For mine is the lay that lightly floats
And mine are the murmuring, dying notes
That fall as soft as snow on the sea
And melt in the heart as instantly:--
And the passionate strain that, deeply going,
  Refines the bosom it trembles thro'
As the musk-wind over the water blowing
  Ruffles the wave but sweetens it too.

Mine is the charm whose mystic sway
The Spirits of past Delight obey;--
Let but the tuneful talisman sound,
And they come like Genii hovering round.
And mine is the gentle song that bears
  From soul to soul the wishes of love,
As a bird that wafts thro' genial airs
  The cinnamon-seed from grove to grove.[311]

'Tis I that mingle in one sweet measure
The past, the present and future of pleasure;
When Memory links the tone that is gone
  With the blissful tone that's still in the ear;
And Hope from a heavenly note flies on
  To a note more heavenly still that is near.

The warrior's heart when touched by me,
Can as downy soft and as yielding be
As his own white plume that high amid death
Thro' the field has shone--yet moves with a breath!
And oh, how the eyes of Beauty glisten.
  When Music has reached her inward soul,
Like the silent stars that wink and listen
  While Heaven's eternal melodies roll.
    So hither I come
    From my fairy home,
  And if there's a magic in Music's strain,
    I swear by the breath
    Of that moonlight wreath
  Thy Lover shall sigh at thy feet again.

'Tis dawn--at least that earlier dawn
Whose glimpses are again withdrawn,[312]
As if the morn had waked, and then
Shut close her lids of light again.
And NOURMAHAL is up and trying
  The wonders of her lute whose strings--
Oh, bliss!--now murmur like the sighing
  From that ambrosial Spirit's wings.
And then her voice--'tis more than human--
  Never till now had it been given
To lips of any mortal woman
  To utter notes so fresh from heaven;
Sweet as the breath of angel sighs
  When angel sighs are most divine.--
"Oh! let it last till night," she cries,
  "And he is more than ever mine."

And hourly she renews the lay,
  So fearful lest its heavenly sweetness
Should ere the evening fade away,--
  For things so heavenly have such fleetness!
But far from fading it but grows
Richer, diviner as it flows;
Till rapt she dwells on every string
  And pours again each sound along,
Like echo, lost and languishing,
  In love with her own wondrous song.

That evening, (trusting that his soul
  Might be from haunting love released
By mirth, by music and the bowl,)
  The Imperial SELIM held a feast
In his magnificent Shalimar:[313]--
In whose Saloons, when the first star
Of evening o'er the waters trembled,
The Valley's loveliest all assembled;
All the bright creatures that like dreams
Glide thro' its foliage and drink beams
Of beauty from its founts and streams;[314]
And all those wandering minstrel-maids,
Who leave--how _can_ they leave?--the shades
Of that dear Valley and are found
  Singing in gardens of the South[315]
Those songs that ne'er so sweetly sound
  As from a young Cashmerian's mouth.

There too the Haram's inmates smile;--
  Maids from the West, with sun-bright hair,
And from the Garden of the NILE,
  Delicate as the roses there;[316]--
Daughters of Love from CYPRUS rocks,
With Paphian diamonds in their locks;[317]--
Light PERI forms such as there are
On the gold Meads of CANDAHAR;[318]
And they before whose sleepy eyes
  In their own bright Kathaian bowers
Sparkle such rainbow butterflies
  That they might fancy the rich flowers
That round them in the sun lay sighing
Had been by magic all set flying.[319]

Every thing young, every thing fair
From East and West is blushing there,
Except--except--oh, NOURMAHAL!
Thou loveliest, dearest of them all,
The one whose smile shone out alone,
Amidst a world the only one;
Whose light among so many lights
Was like that star on starry nights,
The seaman singles from the sky,
To steer his bark for ever by!
Thou wert not there--so SELIM thought,
  And every thing seemed drear without thee;
But, ah! thou wert, thou wert,--and brought
  Thy charm of song all fresh about thee,
Mingling unnoticed with a band
Of lutanists from many a land,
And veiled by such a mask as shades
The features of young Arab maids,[320]--
A mask that leaves but one eye free,
To do its best in witchery,--
She roved with beating heart around
  And waited trembling for the minute
When she might try if still the sound
  Of her loved lute had magic in it.

The board was spread with fruits and wine,
With grapes of gold, like those that shine
On CASBIN hills;[321]--pomegranates full
  Of melting sweetness, and the pears,
And sunniest apples[322] that CAUBUL
  In all its thousand gardens[323] bears;--
Plantains, the golden and the green,
MALAYA'S nectared mangusteen;[324]
Prunes of BOCKHARA, and sweet nuts
  From the far groves of SAMARCAND,
And BASRA dates, and apricots,
  Seed of the Sun,[325] from IRAN'S land;--
With rich conserve of Visna cherries,[326]
Of orange flowers, and of those berries
That, wild and fresh, the young gazelles
Feed on in ERAC's rocky dells.[327]
All these in richest vases smile,
  In baskets of pure santal-wood,
And urns of porcelain from that isle[328]
  Sunk underneath the Indian flood,
Whence oft the lucky diver brings
Vases to grace the halls of kings.
Wines too of every clime and hue
Around their liquid lustre threw;
Amber Rosolli,[329]--the bright dew
From vineyards of the Green-Sea gushing;[330]
And SHIRAZ wine that richly ran
  As if that jewel large and rare,
The ruby for which KUBLAI-KHAN
Offered a city's wealth,[331] was blushing
  Melted within the goblets there!

And amply SELIM quaffs of each,
And seems resolved the flood shall reach
His inward heart,--shedding around
  A genial deluge, as they run,
That soon shall leave no spot undrowned
  For Love to rest his wings upon.
He little knew how well the boy
  Can float upon a goblet's streams,
Lighting them with his smile of joy;--
  As bards have seen him in their dreams,
Down the blue GANGES laughing glide
  Upon a rosy lotus wreath,[332]
Catching new lustre from the tide
  That with his image shone beneath.

But what are cups without the aid
  Of song to speed them as they flow?
And see--a lovely Georgian maid
  With all the bloom, the freshened glow
Of her own country maidens' looks,
When warm they rise from Teflis' brooks;[333]
And with an eye whose restless ray
  Full, floating, dark--oh, he, who knows
His heart is weak, of Heaven should pray
  To guard him from such eyes as those!--
  With a voluptuous wildness flings
  Her snowy hand across the strings
  Of a syrinda[334] and thus sings:--

Come hither, come hither--by night and by day,
  We linger in pleasures that never are gone;
Like the waves of the summer as one dies away
  Another as sweet and as shining comes on.
And the love that is o'er, in expiring gives birth
  To a new one as warm, as unequalled in bliss;
And, oh! if there be an Elysium on earth,
    It is this, it is this.[335]

Here maidens are sighing, and fragrant their sigh
  As the flower of the Amra just oped by a bee;[336]
And precious their tears as that rain from the sky,[337]
  Which turns into pearls as it falls in the sea.
Oh! think what the kiss and the smile must be worth
  When the sigh and the tear are so perfect in bliss,
And own if there be an Elysium on earth,
      It is this, it is this.

Here sparkles the nectar that hallowed by love
  Could draw down those angels of old from their sphere,
Who for wine of this earth[338] left the fountains above,
  And forgot heaven's stars for the eyes we have here.
And, blest with the odor our goblet gives forth,
  What Spirit the sweets of his Eden would miss?
For, oh! if there be an Elysium on earth,
      It is this, it is this.

The Georgian's song was scarcely mute,
  When the same measure, sound for sound,
Was caught up by another lute
  And so divinely breathed around
That all stood husht and wondering,
  And turned and lookt into the air,
As if they thought to see the wing
  Of ISRAFIL[339] the Angel there;--
So powerfully on every soul
That new, enchanted measure stole.
While now a voice sweet as the note
Of the charmed lute was heard to float
Along its chords and so entwine
  Its sounds with theirs that none knew whether
The voice or lute was most divine,
  So wondrously they went together:--

There's a bliss beyond all that the minstrel has told,
  When two that are linkt in one heavenly tie,
With heart never changing and brow never cold,
  Love on thro' all ills and love on till they die!
One hour of a passion so sacred is worth
  Whole ages of heartless and wandering bliss;
And, oh! if there be an Elysium on earth,
      It is this, it is this.

'Twas not the air, 'twas not the words,
But that deep magic in the chords
And in the lips that gave such power
As music knew not till that hour.
At once a hundred voices said,
"It is the maskt Arabian maid!"
While SELIM who had felt the strain
Deepest of any and had lain
Some minutes rapt as in a trance
  After the fairy sounds were o'er.
Too inly touched for utterance,
  Now motioned with his hand for more:--

Fly to the desert, fly with me,
Our Arab's tents are rude for thee;
But oh! the choice what heart can doubt,
Of tents with love or thrones without?
Our rocks are rough, but smiling there
The acacia waves her yellow hair,
Lonely and sweet nor loved the less
For flowering in a wilderness.

Our sands are bare, but down their slope
The silvery-footed antelope
As gracefully and gayly springs
As o'er the marble courts of kings.

Then come--thy Arab maid will be
The loved and lone acacia-tree.
The antelope whose feet shall bless
With their light sound thy loneliness.

Oh! there are looks and tones that dart
An instant sunshine thro' the heart,--
As if the soul that minute caught
Some treasure it thro' life had sought;

As if the very lips and eyes,
Predestined to have all our sighs
And never be forgot again,
Sparkled and spoke before us then!

So came thy every glance and tone,
When first on me they breathed and shone,
New as if brought from other spheres
Yet welcome as if loved for years.

Then fly with me,--if thou hast known
No other flame nor falsely thrown
A gem away, that thou hadst sworn
Should ever in thy heart be worn.

Come if the love thou hast for me
Is pure and fresh as mine for thee,--
Fresh as the fountain under ground,
When first 'tis by the lapwing found.[340]

But if for me thou dost forsake
Some other maid and rudely break
Her worshipt image from its base,
To give to me the ruined place;--

Then fare thee well--I'd rather make
My bower upon some icy lake
When thawing suns begin to shine
Than trust to love so false as thine.

There was a pathos in this lay,
  That, even without enchantment's art,
Would instantly have found its way
  Deep in to SELIM'S burning heart;
But breathing as it did a tone
To earthly lutes and lips unknown;
With every chord fresh from the touch
Of Music's Spirit,--'twas too much!
Starting he dasht away the cup,--
Which all the time of this sweet air
His hand had held, untasted, up,
As if 'twere fixt by magic there--
And naming her, so long unnamed,
So long unseen, wildly exclaimed,
"Oh NOURMAHAL! oh NOURMAHAL!
  "Hadst thou but sung this witching strain,
"I could forget--forgive thee all
"And never leave those eyes again."

The mask is off--the charm is wrought--
And SELIM to his heart has caught,
In blushes, more than ever bright,
His NOURMAHAL, his Haram's Light!
And well do vanisht frowns enhance
The charm of every brightened glance;
And dearer seems each dawning smile
For having lost its light awhile:
And happier now for all her sighs
As on his arm her head reposes
She whispers him, with laughing eyes,
  "Remember, love, the Feast of Roses!"


FADLADEEN, at the conclusion of this light rhapsody, took occasion to sum
up his opinion of the young Cashmerian's poetry,--of which, he trusted,
they had that evening heard the last.  Having recapitulated the epithets,
"frivolous"--"inharmonious"--"nonsensical," he proceeded to say that,
viewed in the most favorable light it resembled one of those Maldivian
boats, to which the Princess had alluded in the relation of her dream,--
a slight, gilded thing, sent adrift without rudder or ballast, and with
nothing but vapid sweets and faded flowers on board.  The profusion,
indeed, of flowers and birds, which this poet had ready on all occasions,
--not to mention dews, gems, etc.--was a most oppressive kind of opulence
to his hearers; and had the unlucky effect of giving to his style all the
glitter of the flower garden without its method, and all the flutter of
the aviary without its song. In addition to this, he chose his subjects
badly, and was always most inspired by the worst parts of them.  The
charms of paganism, the merits of rebellion,--these were the themes
honored with his particular enthusiasm; and, in the poem just recited, one
of his most palatable passages was in praise of that beverage of the
Unfaithful, wine;--"being, perhaps," said he, relaxing into a smile, as
conscious of his own character in the Haram on this point, "one of those
bards, whose fancy owes all its illumination to the grape, like that
painted porcelain,[341] so curious and so rare, whose images are only
visible when liquor is poured into it." Upon the whole, it was his
opinion, from the specimens which they had heard, and which, he begged to
say, were the most tiresome part of the journey, that--whatever other
merits this well-dressed young gentleman might possess--poetry was by no
means his proper avocation; "and indeed," concluded the critic, "from his
fondness for flowers and for birds, I would venture to suggest that a
florist or a bird-catcher is a much more suitable calling for him than a
poet."

They had now begun to ascend those barren mountains, which separate
Cashmere from the rest of India; and, as the heats were intolerable, and
the time of their encampments limited to the few hours necessary for
refreshment and repose, there was an end to all their delightful evenings,
and LALLA ROOKH saw no more of FERAMORZ. She now felt that her short dream
of happiness was over, and that she had nothing but the recollection of
its few blissful hours, like the one draught of sweet water that serves
the camel across the wilderness, to be her heart's refreshment during the
dreary waste of life that was before her. The blight that had fallen upon
her spirits soon found its way to her cheek, and her ladies saw with
regret--though not without some suspicion of the cause--that the beauty of
their mistress, of which they were almost as proud as of their own, was
fast vanishing away at the very moment of all when she had most need of
it. What must the King of Bucharia feel, when, instead of the lively and
beautiful LALLA ROOKH, whom the poets of Delhi had described as more
perfect than the divinest images in the house of AZOR,[342] he should
receive a pale and inanimate victim, upon whose cheek neither health nor
pleasure bloomed, and from whose eyes Love had fled,--to hide himself in
her heart?

If any thing could have charmed away the melancholy of her spirits, it
would have been the fresh airs and enchanting scenery of that Valley,
which the Persians so justly called the Unequalled.[343] But neither the
coolness of its atmosphere, so luxurious after toiling up those bare and
burning mountains,--neither the splendor of the minarets and pagodas, that
shone put from the depth of its woods, nor the grottoes, hermitages, and
miraculous fountains,[344] which make every spot of that region holy
ground,--neither the countless waterfalls, that rush into the Valley from
all those high and romantic mountains that encircle it, nor the fair city
on the Lake, whose houses, roofed with flowers,[345] appeared at a
distance like one vast and variegated parterre;--not all these wonders and
glories of the most lovely country under the sun could steal her heart for
a minute from those sad thoughts which but darkened and grew bitterer
every step she advanced.

The gay pomps and processions that met her upon her entrance into the
Valley, and the magnificence with which the roads all along were
decorated, did honor to the taste and gallantry of the young King. It was
night when they approached the city, and, for the last two miles, they had
passed under arches, thrown from hedge to hedge, festooned with only those
rarest roses from which the Attar Gul, more precious than gold, is
distilled, and illuminated in rich and fanciful forms with lanterns of the
triple-colored tortoise-shell of Pegu.[346] Sometimes, from a dark wood
by the side of the road, a display of fireworks would break out, so sudden
and so brilliant, that a Brahmin might fancy he beheld that grove, in
whose purple shade the God of Battles was born, bursting into a flame at
the moment of his birth;--while, at other times, a quick and playful
irradiation continued to brighten all the fields and gardens by which they
passed, forming a line of dancing lights along the horizon; like the
meteors of the north as they are seen by those hunters who pursue the
white and blue foxes on the confines of the Icy Sea.

These arches and fireworks delighted the Ladies of the Princess
exceedingly; and, with their usual good logic, they deduced from his taste
for illuminations, that the King of Bucharia would make the most exemplary
husband imaginable. Nor, indeed, could LALLA ROOKH herself help feeling
the kindness and splendor with which the young bridegroom welcomed
her;--but she also felt how painful is the gratitude which kindness from
those we cannot love excites; and that their best blandishments come over
the heart with all that chilling and deadly sweetness which we can fancy
in the cold, odoriferous wind[347] that is to blow over this earth in the
last days.

The marriage was fixed for the morning after her arrival, when she was,
for the first time, to be presented to the monarch in that Imperial Palace
beyond the lake, called the Shalimar.  Though never before had a night of
more wakeful and anxious thought been passed in the Happy Valley, yet,
when she rose in the morning, and her Ladies came around her, to assist in
the adjustment of the bridal ornaments, they thought they had never seen
her look half so beautiful.  What she had lost of the bloom and radiancy
of her charms was more than made up by that intellectual expression, that
soul beaming forth from the eyes, which is worth all the rest of
loveliness. When they had tinged her fingers with the Henna leaf, and
placed upon her brow a small coronet of jewels, of the shape worn by the
ancient Queens of Bucharia, they flung over her head the rose-colored
bridal veil, and she proceeded to the barge that was to convey her across
the lake;--first kissing, with a mournful look, the little amulet of
cornelian, which her father at parting had hung about her neck.

The morning was as fresh and fair as the maid on whose nuptials it rose,
and the shining lake, all covered with boats, the minstrels playing upon
the shores of the islands, and the crowded summer-houses on the green
hills around, with shawls and banners waving from their roofs, presented
such a picture of animated rejoicing, as only she, who was the object of
it all, did not feel with transport. To LALLA ROOKH alone it was a
melancholy pageant; nor could she have even borne to look upon the scene,
were it not for a hope that among the crowds around, she might once more
perhaps catch a glimpse of FERAMORZ. So much was her imagination haunted
by this thought that there was scarcely an islet or boat she passed on the
way at which her heart did not flutter with the momentary fancy that he
was there. Happy, in her eyes, the humblest slave upon whom the light of
his dear looks fell!--In the barge immediately after the Princess sat
FADLADEEN, with his silken curtains thrown widely apart, that all might
have the benefit of his august presence, and with his head full of the
speech he was to deliver to the King, "concerning FERAMORZ and literature
and the Chabuk as connected therewith."

They now had entered the canal which leads from the Lake to the splendid
domes and saloons of the Shalimar and went gliding on through the gardens
that ascended from each bank, full of flowering shrubs that made the air
all perfume; while from the middle of the canal rose jets of water, smooth
and unbroken, to such a dazzling height that they stood like tall pillars
of diamond in the sunshine. After sailing under the arches of various
saloons they at length arrived at the last and most magnificent, where the
monarch awaited the coming of his bride; and such was the agitation of her
heart and frame that it was with difficulty she could walk up the marble
steps which were covered with cloth of gold for her ascent from the barge.
At the end of the hall stood two thrones, as precious as the Cerulean
Throne of Koolburga,[348] on one of which sat ALIRIS, the youthful King
of Bucharia, and on the other was in a few minutes to be placed the most
beautiful Princess in the world. Immediately upon the entrance of LALLA
ROOKH into the saloon the monarch descended from his throne to meet her;
but scarcely had he time to take her hand in his when she screamed with
surprise and fainted at his feet. It was FERAMORZ, himself, who stood
before her! FERAMORZ, was, himself, the Sovereign of Bucharia, who in this
disguise had accompanied his young bride from Delhi, and having won her
love as an humble minstrel now amply deserved to enjoy it as a King.

The consternation of FADLADEEN at this discovery was, for the moment,
almost pitiable. But change of opinion is a resource too convenient in
courts for this experienced courtier not to have learned to avail himself
of it. His criticisms were all, of course, recanted instantly: he was
seized with an admiration of the King's verses, as unbounded as, he begged
him to believe, it was disinterested; and the following week saw him in
possession of an additional place, swearing by all the Saints of Islam
that never had there existed so great a poet as the Monarch ALIRIS, and
moreover ready to prescribe his favorite regimen of the Chabuk for every
man, woman and child that dared to think otherwise.

Of the happiness of the King and Queen of Bucharia, after such a
beginning, there can be but little doubt; and among the lesser symptoms it
is recorded of LALLA ROOKH that to the day of her death in memory of their
delightful journey she never called the King by any other name than
FERAMORZ.


[1] These particulars of the visit of the King of Bucharia to Aurungzebe
are found in _Dow's "History of Hindostan_," vol. iii. p. 392.

[2] Tulip cheek.

[3] The mistress of Mejnoun, upon whose story so many Romances in all the
languages of the East are founded.

[4] For the loves of this celebrated beauty with Khosrou and with Ferhad,
see _D'Herbelot, Gibbon, Oriental Collections_, etc.

[5] "The history of the loves of Dewild and Chizer, the son of the
Emperor Alla, is written in an elegant poem, by the noble Chusero."-
_Ferishta_.

[6] Gul Reazee.

[7] "One mark of honor or knighthood bestowed by the Emperor is the
permission to wear a small kettle-drum at the bows of their saddles, which
at first was invented for the training of hawks, and to call them to the
lure, and is worn in the field by all sportsmen to that end."--_Fryer's_
Travels. "Those on whom the King has conferred the privilege must wear an
ornament of jewels on the right side of the turban, surmounted by a high
plume of the feathers of a kind of egret. This bird is found only in
Cashmere, and the feathers are carefully collected for the King, who
bestows them on his nobles."--_Elphinstone's_ Account of Cabul.

[8] "Khedar Khan, the Khakan, or King of Turquestan beyond the Gibon (at
the end of the eleventh century), whenever he appeared abroad was preceded
by seven hundred horsemen with silver battle-axes, and was followed by an
equal number bearing maces of gold. He was a great patron of poetry, and
it was he who used to preside at public exercises of genius, with four
basins of gold and silver by him to distribute among the poets who
excelled."--_Richardson's_ Dissertation prefixed to his Dictionary.

[9] "The kubdeh, a large golden knob, generally in the shape of a pine-
apple, on the top of the canopy over the litter or palanquin."--_Scott's_
Notes on the Bahardanush.

[10] In the Poem of Zohair, in the Moallakat, there is the following
lively description of "a company of maidens seated on camels." "They are
mounted in carriages covered with costly awnings, and with rose-colored
veils, the linings of which have the hue of crimson Andem-wood. "When they
ascend from the bosom of the vale, they sit forward on the saddlecloth,
with every mark of a voluptuous gayety. "Now, When they have reached the
brink of yon blue-gushing rivulet, they fix the poles of their tents like
the Arab with a settled mansion."

[11] See _Bernier's_ description of the attendants on Rauchanara Begum, in
her progress to Cashmere.

[12] This hypocritical Emperor would have made a worthy associate of
certain Holy Leagues.--"He held the cloak of religion [says Dow] between
his actions and the vulgar; and impiously thanked the Divinity for a
success which he owed to his own wickedness. When he was murdering and
persecuting his brothers and their families, he was building a magnificent
mosque at Delhi, as an offering to God for his assistance to him in the
civil wars. He acted as high priest at the consecration of this temple;
and made a practice of attending divine service there, in the humble dress
of a Fakeer. But when he lifted one hand to the Divinity, he, with the
other, signed warrants for the assassination of his relations."--"_History
of Hindostan_,". vol. iii. p.335. See also the curious letter of
Aurungzebe, given in the _Oriental Collections_, vol. i. p.320.

[13] "The idol at Jaghernat has two fine diamonds for eyes. No goldsmith
is suffered to enter the Pagoda, one having stole one of these eyes, being
locked up all night with the Idol."--_Tavernier_.

[14] See a description of these royal Gardens in "An Account of the
present State of Delhi, by Lieut. W. Franklin."--_Asiat. Research_, vol.
iv. p. 417.

[15] "In the neighborhood is Notte Gill, or the Lake of Pearl, which
receives this name from its pellucid water."--_Pennant's_ "Hindostan."
"Nasir Jung encamped in the vicinity of the Lake of Tonoor, amused himself
with sailing on that clear and beautiful water, and gave it the fanciful
name of Motee Talah, 'the Lake of Pearls,' which it still retains."--
_Wilks's_ "South of India."

[16] Sir Thomas Roe, Ambassador from James I. to Jehanguire.

[17] "The romance Wemakweazra, written in Persian verse, which contains
the loves of Wamak and Ezra, two celebrated lovers who lived before the
time of Mahomet."--_Note on the Oriental Tales_.

[18] Their amour is recounted in the Shah-Namh of Ferdousi; and there is
much beauty in the passage which describes the slaves of Rodahver sitting
on the bank of the river and throwing flowers into the stream, in order to
draw the attention of the young Hero who is encamped on the opposite
side.--See _Champion's_ translation.

[19] Rustam is the Hercules of the Persians. For the particulars of his
victory over the Sepeed Deeve, or White Demon, see _Oriental Collections_,
vol. ii. p. 45.--Near the city of Shiraz is an immense quadrangular
monument, in commemoration of this combat, called the Kelaat-i-Deev
Sepeed, or castle of the White Giant, which Father Angelo, in his
"_Gazophilacium Persicum_," p.127, declares to have been the most
memorable monument of antiquity which he had seen in Persia.--See
_Ouseley's_ "Persian Miscellanies."

[20] "The women of the Idol, or dancing girls of the Pagoda, have little
golden bells, fastened to their feet, the soft harmonious tinkling of
which vibrates in unison with the exquisite melody of their voices."--
_Maurice's_ "Indian Antiquities."

"The Arabian courtesans, like the Indian women, have little golden bells
fastened round their legs, neck, and elbows, to the sound of which they
dance before the King. The Arabian princesses wear golden rings on their
fingers, to which little bells are suspended, as well as in the flowing
tresses of their hair, that their superior rank may be known and they
themselves receive in passing the homage due to them."--See _Calmet's_
Dictionary, art. "Bells."

[21] The Indian Apollo. "He and the three Ramas are described as youths
of perfect beauty, and the princesses of Hindustan were all passionately
in love with Chrishna, who continues to this hour the darling God of the
Indan women."--_Sir W. Jones_, on the Gods of Greece, Italy, and India.

[22] See _Turner's_ Embassy for a description of this animal, "the most
beautiful among the whole tribe of goats." The material for the shawls
(which is carried to Cashmere) is found next the skin.

[23] For the real history of this Impostor, whose original name was Hakem
ben Haschem, and who was called Mocanna from the veil of silver gauze (or,
as others say, golden) which he always wore, see _D'Herbelot_.

[24] Khorassan signifies, in the old Persian language, Province or Region
of the Sun.--_Sir W. Jones_.

[25] "The fruits of Meru are finer than those of any other place: and one
cannot see in any other city such palaces with groves, and streams, and
gardens."--_Ebn Haukal's_ Geography.

[26] One of the royal cities of Khorassan.

[27] Moses.

[28] Black was the color adopted by the Caliphs of the House of Abbas, in
their garments, turbans, and standards.

[29] "Our dark javelins, exquisitely wrought of Khathaian reeds, slender
and delicate."--_Poem of Amru_.

[30] Pichula, used anciently for arrows by the Persians.

[31] The Persians call this plant Gaz. The celebrated shaft of Isfendiar,
one of their ancient heroes, was made of it.--"Nothing can be more
beautiful than the appearance of this plant in flower during the rains on
the banks of rivers, where it is usually interwoven with a lovely twining
asclepias."--_Sir W. Jones_..

[32] The oriental plane. "The chenar is a delightful tree; its bole is of
a fine white and smooth bark; and its foliage, which grows in a tuft at
the summit, is of a bright green."--_Morier's Travels_..

[33] The burning fountains of Brahma near Chittogong, esteemed as
holy.--_Turner_.

[34] China.

[35] "The name of tulip is said to be of Turkish extraction, and given to
the flower on account of its resembling a turban."--_Beckmann_'s History
of Inventions.

[36] "The inhabitants of Bucharia wear a round cloth bonnet, shaped much
after the Polish fashion, having a large fur border. They tie their
kaftans about the middle with a girdle of a kind of silk crape, several
times round the body."--_Account of Independent Tartary, in Pinkerton's
Collection_.

[37] In the war of the Caliph Mahadi against the Empress Irene, for an
account of which _vide Gibbon_, vol. x.

[38] When Soliman travelled, the eastern writers say, "He had a carpet of
green silk on which his throne was placed, being of a prodigious length
and breadth, and sufficient for all his forces to stand upon, the men
placing themselves on his right hand, and the spirits on his left; and
that when all were in order, the wind, at his command, took up the carpet,
and transported it, with all that were upon it, wherever he pleased; the
army of birds at the same time flying over their heads, and forming a kind
of canopy to shade them from the sun."--Sale's Koran, vol. ii. p. 214,
note.

[39] The transmigration of souls was one of his doctrines.--_Vide
D'Herbelot_..

[40] "And when we said unto the angels. Worship Adam, they all worshipped
him except Eblis (Lucifer), who refused." _The. Koran_, chap. ii.

[41] Moses.

[42] Jesus.

[43] The Amu, which rises in the Belur Tag, or Dark Mountains, and running
nearly from east to west, splits into two branches; one of which falls
into the Caspian Sea, and the other into Aral Nahr, or the Lake of Eagles.

[44] The nightingale.

[45] The cities of Com (or Koom) and Cashan are full of mosques,
mausoleums and sepulchres of the descendants of Ali, the Saints of Persia
--_Chardin_..

[46] An island in the Persian Gulf, celebrated for its white wine.

[47] The miraculous well at Mecca: so called, says Sale, from the
murmuring of its waters.

[48] The god Hannaman.--"Apes are in many parts of India highly venerated,
out of respect to the God Hannaman, a deity partaking of the form of that
race."--_Pennant's_ Hindoostan. See a curious account in _Stephen's
Persia_, of a solemn embassy from some part of the Indies to Goa when the
Portuguese were there, offering vast treasures for the recovery of a
monkey's tooth, which they held in great veneration, and which had been
taken away upon the conquest of the kingdom of Jafanapatan.

[49] A kind of lantern formerly used by robbers, called the Hand of Glory,
the candle for which was made of the fat of a dead malefactor. This,
however, was rather a western than an eastern superstition.

[50] The material of which images of Gaudma (the Birman Deity) are made,
is held sacred. "Birmans may not purchase the marble in mass, but are
suffered, and indeed encouraged, to buy figures of the Deity ready made."
--_Sytnes's_ "Ava," vol. ii. p. 876.

[51] "It is commonly said in Persia, that if a man breathe in the hot
south wind, which in June or July passes over that flower (the Kerzereh),
it will kill him."--_Thevenot_.

[52] The humming bird is said to run this risk for the purpose of picking
the crocodile's teeth. The same circumstance is related of the lapwing, as
a fact to which he was witness, by _Paul Lucas, "Voyage fait en_ 1714."

The ancient story concerning the Trochilus, or humming-bird, entering with
impunity into the mouth of the crocodile, is firmly believed at
Java.--_Barrow's "Cochin-China_."

[53] "The feast of Lanterns celebrated at Yamtcheou with more magnificence
than anywhere else! and the report goes that the illuminations there are
so splendid, that an Emperor once, not daring openly to leave his Court to
go thither, committed himself with the Queen and several Princesses of his
family into the hands of a magician, who promised to transport them
thither in a trice. He made them in the night to ascend magnificent
thrones that were borne up by swans, which in a moment arrived at
Yamtcheou. The Emperor saw at his leisure all the solemnity, being carried
upon a cloud that hovered over the city and descended by degrees; and came
back again with the same speed and equipage, nobody at court perceiving
his absence."--_The Present State of China_," p. 156.

[54] "The vulgar ascribe it to an accident that happened in the family of
a famous mandarin, whose daughter, walking one evening upon the shore of a
lake, fell in and was drowned: this afflicted father, with his family, ran
thither, and the better to find her, he caused a great company of lanterns
to be lighted. All the inhabitants of the place thronged after him with
torches. The year ensuing they made fires upon the shores the same day;
they continued the ceremony every year, every one lighted his lantern, and
by degrees it commenced into a custom."--_The Present State of China_."

[55] "Thou hast ravished my heart with one of thine eyes."--_Sol. Song_.

[56] "They tinged the ends of her fingers scarlet with Henna, so that they
resembled branches of coral."--_Story of Prince Futtun in Bahardanush_.

[57] "The women blacken the inside of their eyelids with a powder named
the black Kohol."--_Russell_.

"None of these ladies," says _Shaw_, "take themselves to be completely
dressed, till they have tinged their hair and edges of their eyelids with
the powder of lead ore. Now, as this operation is performed by dipping
first into the powder a small wooden bodkin of the thickness of a quill,
and then drawing it afterwards through the eyelids over the ball of the
eye, we shall have a lively image of what the Prophet (Jer. iv. 30) may be
supposed to mean by _rending the eyes with painting_. This practice is no
doubt of great antiquity; for besides the instance already taken notice
of, we find that where Jezebel is said (2 Kings ix. 30.) _to have painted
her face_, the original words are, _she adjusted her eyes with the powder
of lead-ore_."--_Shaw's_ Travels.

[58] "The appearance of the blossoms of the gold-colored Campac on the
black hair of the Indian women has supplied the Sanscrit Poets with many
elegant allusions."--See _Asiatic Researches_, vol. iv.

[59] A tree famous for its perfume, and common on the hills of
Yemen.--_Niebuhr_.

[60] Of the genus mimosa "which droops its branches whenever any person
approaches it, seeming as if it saluted those who retire under its
shade."--_Niebuhr_.

[61] Cloves are a principal ingredient in the composition of the perfumed
rods, which men of rank keep constantly burning in their presence.--
_Turner's_ "Tibet."

[62] "Thousands of variegated loories visit the coral-trees."--_Barrow_.

[63] "In Mecca there are quantities of blue pigeons, which none will
affright or abuse, much less kill."--_Pitt's_ Account of the Mahometans.

[64] "The Pagoda Thrush is esteemed among the first choristers of India.
It sits perched on the sacred pagodas, and from thence delivers its
melodious song."--_Pennant's_ "Hindostan."

[65] _Tavernier_ adds, that while the Birds of Paradise lie in this
intoxicated state, the emmets come and eat off their legs; and that hence
it is they are said to have no feet.

[66] Birds of Paradise, which, at the nutmeg season, come in flights from
the southern isles to India; and "the strength of the nutmeg," says
_Tavernier_, "so intoxicates them that they fall dead drunk to the earth."

[67] "That bird which liveth in Arabia, and buildeth its nest with
cinnamon."--_Brown's_ Vulgar Errors.

[68] "The spirits of the martyrs will be lodged in the crops of green
birds."--_Gibbon_, vol. ix. p. 421.

[69] Shedad, who made the delicious gardens of Irim, in imitation of
Paradise, and was destroyed by lightning the first time he attempted to
enter them.

[70] "My Pandits assure me that the plant before us (the Nilica) is their
Sephalica, thus named because the bees are supposed to sleep on its
blossoms."--_Sir W. Jones_.

[71] They deterred it till the King of Flowers should ascend his throne of
enamelled foliage."--_The Bahardanush_".

[72] "One of the head-dresses of the Persian women is composed of a light
golden chain-work, set with small pearls, with a thin gold plate pendant,
about the bigness of a crown-piece, on which is impressed an Arabian
prayer, and which hangs upon the cheek below the ear."--_Hanway's_
Travels.

[73] "Certainly the women of Yezd are the handsomest women in Persia. The
proverb is, that to live happy a man must have a wife of Yezd, eat the
bread of Yezdecas, and drink the wine of Shiraz."--_Tavernier_.

[74] Musnuds are cushioned seats, usually reserved for persons of
distinction.

[75] The Persians, like the ancient Greeks call their musical modes or
Perdas by the names of different countries or cities, as the mode of
Isfahan, the mode of Irak, etc.

[76] A river which flows near the ruins of Chilminar.

[77] "To the north of us (on the coast of the Caspian, near Badku,) was a
mountain, which sparkled like diamonds, arising from the sea-glass and
crystals with which it abounds."--_Journey of the Russian Ambassador to
Persia_, 1746.

[78] "To which will be added, the sound of the bells, hanging on the
trees, which will be put in motion by the wind proceeding from the throne
of God, as often as the blessed wish for music."--_Sale_.

[79] "Whose wanton eyes resemble blue water-lilies, agitated by the
breeze."--_Jayadeva_.

[80] The blue lotos, which grows in Cashmere and in Persia.

[81] It has been generally supposed that the Mahometans prohibit all
pictures of animals; but _Toderini_ shows that, though the practice is
forbidden by the Koran, they are not more averse to painted figures and
images than other people. From Mr. Murphy's work, too, we find that the
Arabs of Spain had no objection to the introduction of figures into
Painting.

[82] This is not quite astronomically true. "Dr. Hadley [says Keil] has
shown that Venus is brightest when she is about forty degrees removed from
the sun; and that then but _only a fourth part_ of her lucid disk is to be
seen from the earth."

[83] The wife of Potiphar, thus named by the Orientals. The passion which
this frail beauty of antiquity conceived for her young Hebrew slave has
given rise to a much esteemed poem in the Persian language, entitled
_Yusef vau Zelikha_, by _Noureddin Jami;_ the manuscript copy of which, in
the Bodleian Library at Oxford, is supposed to be the finest in the whole
world."--_Note upon Nott's Translation of Hafez_."

[84] The particulars of Mahomet's amour with Mary, the Coptic girl, in
justification of which he added a new chapter to the Koran, may be found
in _Gagnier's Notes upon Abulfeda_, p. 151.

[85] "Deep blue is their mourning color." _Hanway_.

[86] The sorrowful nyctanthes, which begins to spread its rich odor after
sunset.

[87] "Concerning the vipers, which Pliny says were frequent among the
balsam-trees, I made very particular inquiry; several were brought me
alive both to Yambo and Jidda."--_Bruce_.

[88] In the territory of Istkahar there is a kind of apple, half of which
is sweet and half sour.--_Ebn Haukal_.

[89] "The place where the Whangho, a river of Tibet, rises, and where
there are more than a hundred springs, which sparkle like stars; whence it
is called Hotun-nor, that is, the Sea of Stars."--_Description of Tibet in
Pinkerton_.

[90] "The Lescar or Imperial Camp is divided, like a regular town, into
squares, alleys, and streets, and from a rising ground furnishes one of
the most agreeable prospects in the world. Starting up in a few hours in
an uninhabited plain, it raises the idea of a city built by enchantment.
Even those who leave their houses in cities to follow the prince in his
progress are frequently so charmed with the Lescar, when situated in a
beautiful and convenient place, that they cannot prevail with themselves
to remove. To prevent this inconvenience to the court, the Emperor, after
sufficient time is allowed to the tradesmen to follow, orders them to be
burnt out of their tents."--_Dow's Hindostan_.

[91] The edifices of Chilminar and Balbec are supposed to have been built
by the Genii, acting under the orders of Jan ben Jan, who governed the
world long before the time of Adam.

[92] "A superb camel, ornamented with strings and tufts of small
shells."--_Ali Bey_.

[93] A native of Khorassan, and allured southward by means of the water of
a fountain between Shiraz and Ispahan, called the Fountain of Birds, of
which it is so fond that it will follow wherever that water is carried.

[94] "Some of the camels have bells about their necks, and some about
their legs, like those which our carriers put about their fore-horses'
necks, which together with the servants (who belong to the camels, and
travel on foot), singing all night, make a pleasant noise, and the journey
passes away delightfully."--_Pitt's_ Account of the Mahometans.

"The camel-driver follows the camels singing, and sometimes playing upon
his pipe; the louder he sings and pipes, the faster the camels go. Nay,
they will stand still when he gives over his music."--_Tavernier_.

[95] "This trumpet is often called, in Abyssinia, _nesser cano_, which
signifies the Note of the Eagle."--_Note of Bruce's Editor_.

[96] The two black standards borne before the Caliphs of the House of
Abbas were called, allegorically, The Night and The Shadow.--See _Gibbon_.

[97] The Mohometan religion.

[98] "The Persians swear by the Tomb of Shad Besade, who is buried at
Casbin; and when one desires another to asseverate a matter he will ask
him, if he dare swear by the Holy Grave."--_Struy_.

[99] Mahadi, in a single pilgrimage to Mecca, expended six millions of
dinars of gold.

[100] The inhabitants of Hejaz or Arabia Petraea, called by an Eastern
writer "The People of the Rock."--_Ebn Haukal_.

[101] "Those horses, called by the Arabians Kochlani, of whom a written
genealogy has been kept for 2000 years.  They are said to derive their
origin from King Solomon's steeds."--_Niebuhr_.

[102] "Many of the figures on the blades of their swords are wrought in
gold or silver, or in marquetry with small gems."--_Asiat. Misc_. v. i.

[103] Azab or Saba.

[104] "The chiefs of the Uzbek Tartars wear a plume of white heron's
feathers in their turbans."--_Account of Independent Tartary_.

[105] In the mountains of Nishapour and Tous in (Khorassan) they find
turquoises.--_Ebn Huukal_.

[106] The Ghebers or Guebres, those original natives of Persia, who
adhered to their ancient faith, the religion of Zoroaster, and who, after
the conquest of their country by the Arabs, were either persecuted at
home, or forced to become wanderers abroad.

[107] "Yezd, the chief residence of those ancient natives who worship the
Sun and the Fire, which latter they have carefully kept lighted, without
being once extinguished for a moment, about 3000 years, on a mountain near
Yezd, called Ater Quedah, signifying the House or Mansion of the Fire. He
is reckoned very unfortunate who dies off that mountain."--_Stephen's
Persia_.

[108] When the weather is hazy, the springs of Naphtha (on an island near
Baku) boil up the higher, and the Naphtha often takes fire on the surface
of the earth, and runs in a flame into the sea to a distance almost
incredible."--_Hanway on the Everlasting Fire at Baku_.

[109] _Savary_ says of the south wind, which blows in Egypt from February
to May, "Sometimes it appears only in the shape of an impetuous whirlwind,
which passes rapidly, and is fatal to the traveller, surprised in the
middle of the deserts. Torrents of burning sand roll before it, the
firmament is enveloped in a thick veil, and the sun appears of the color
of blood. Sometimes whole caravans are buried in it."

[110] In the great victory gained by Mahomed at Beder, he was assisted,
say the Mussulmans, by three thousand angels led by Gabriel mounted on his
horse Hiazum.--See _The Koran and its Commentators_.

[111] The Techir, or cry of the Arabs. "Alla Acbar!" says Ockley, means,
"God is most mighty."

[112] The ziraleet is a kind of chorus, which the women of the East sing
upon joyful occasions.

[113] The Dead Sea, which contains neither animal nor vegetable life.

[114] The ancient Oxus.

[115] A city of Transoxiana.

[116] "You never can cast your eyes on this tree, but you meet there
either blossoms or fruit; and as the blossom drops underneath on the
ground (which is frequently covered with these purple-colored flowers),
others come forth in their stead," etc.--_Nieuhoff_.

[117] The Demons of the Persian mythology.

[118] Carreri mentions the fire-flies in India during the rainy
season.--See his Travels.

[119] Sennacherib, called by the Orientals King of Moussal.--_D'Herbelot_.

[120] Chosroes. For the description of his Throne or Palace, see _Gibbon
and D'Herbelot_.

There were said to be under this Throne or Palace of Khosrou Parviz a
hundred vaults filled with "treasures so immense that some Mahometan
writers tell us, their Prophet to encourage his disciples carried them to
a rock which at his command opened and gave them a prospect through it of
the treasures of Khosrou."--_Universal History_.

[121] "The crown of Gerashid is cloudy and tarnished before the heron tuft
of thy turban."--From one of the elegies or songs in praise of Ali,
written in characters of gold round the gallery of Abbas's tomb.--See
_Chardin_.

[122] The beauty of Ali's eyes was so remarkable, that whenever the
Persians would describe anything as very lovely, they say it is Ayn Hali,
or the Eyes of Ali.--_Chardin_.

[123] "Nakshab, the name of a city in Transoxiana, where they say there is
a well, in which the appearance of the moon is to be seen night and day."

[124] The Shechinah, called Sakfnat in the Koran.--See _Sale's Note_,
chap. ii.

[125] The parts of the night are made known as well by instruments of
music, as by the rounds of the watchmen with cries and small drums.--See
_Burder's Oriental Customs_, vol. i. p. 119.

[126] The Serrapurda, high screens of red cloth, stiffened with cane, used
to enclose a considerable space round the royal tents.--_Notes on the
Bakardanush.

The tents of Princes were generally illuminated. Norden tells us that the
tent of the Bey of Girge was distinguished from the other tents by forty
lanterns being suspended before it.--See _Harmer's Observations on Job_.

[127] "From the groves of orange trees at Kauzeroon the bees cull a
celebrated honey.--_Morier's Travels_.

[128] "A custom still subsisting at this day, seems to me to prove that
the Egyptians formerly sacrificed a young virgin to the God of the Nile;
for they now make a statue of earth in shape of a girl, to which they give
the name of the Betrothed Bride, and throw it into the river."--_Savary_.

[129] That they knew the secret of the Greek fire among the Mussulmans
early in the eleventh century, appears from _Dow's_ account of Mamood I.
"When he at Moultan, finding that the country of the Jits was defended by
great rivers, he ordered fifteen hundred boats to be built, each of which
he armed with six iron spikes, projecting from their prows and sides, to
prevent their being boarded by the enemy, who were very expert in that
kind of war. When he had launched this fleet, he ordered twenty archers
into each boat, and five others with fire-balls, to burn the craft of the
Jits, and naphtha to set the whole river on fire."

[130] The Greek fire, which was occasionally lent by the emperors to their
allies. "It was," says Gibbon, "either launched in red-hot balls of stone
and iron, or darted in arrows and javelins, twisted round with flax and
tow, which had deeply imbibed the imflammable oil."

[131] See _Hanway's_ Account of the Springs of Naphtha at Baku (which is
called by _Lieutenant Pottinger_ Joala Mookee, or, the Flaming Mouth),
taking fire and running into the sea. _Dr. Cooke_, in his Journal,
mentions some wells in Circassia, strongly impregnated with this
inflammable oil, from which issues boiling water. "Though the weather," he
adds, "was now very cold, the warmth of these wells of hot water produced
near them the verdure and flowers of spring.'

[132] "At the great festival of fire, called the Sheb Seze, they used to
set fire to large bunches of dry combustibles, fastened round wild beasts
and birds, which being then let loose, the air and earth appeared one
great illumination; and as these terrified creatures naturally fled to the
woods for shelter, it is easy to conceive the conflagrations they
produced."--_Richardson's Dissertation_.

[133] "The righteous shall be given to drink of pure wine, sealed: the
seal whereof shall be musk."--_Koran_, chap lxxxiii.

[134] The Afghans believe each of the numerous solitudes and deserts of
their country to be inhabited by a lonely demon, whom they call The
Ghoolee Beeabau, or Spirit of the Waste. They often illustrate the
wildness of any sequestered tribe, by saying they are wild as the Demon of
the Waste."--_Elphinstone's Caubul_.

[135] "They have all a great reverence for burial-grounds, which they
sometimes call by the poetical name of Cities of the Silent, and which
they people with the ghosts of the departed, who sit each at the head of
his own grave, invisible to mortal eyes."--_Elphinstone_.

[136] The celebrity of Mazagong is owing to its mangoes, which are
certainly the best I ever tasted. The parent-tree, from which all those of
this species have been grafted, is honored during the fruit-season by a
guard of sepoys; and, in the reign of Shah Jehan, couriers ware stationed
between Delhi and the Mahratta coast, to secure an abundant and fresh
supply of mangoes for the royal table."--_Mrs. Graham's_ Journal of
Residence in India.

[137] This old porcelain is found in digging, and "if it is esteemed, it
is not because it has acquired any new degree of beauty in the earth, but
because it has retained its ancient beauty; and this alone is of great
importance in China, where they give large sums for the smallest vessels
which were used under the Emperors Yan and Chun, who reigned many ages
before the dynasty of Tang, at which time porcelain began to be used by
the Emperors" (about the year 442).--_Dunn's_ Collection of curious
Observations, etc.

[138] The blacksmith Gao, who successfully resisted the tyrant Zohak, and
whose apron became the royal standard of Persia.

[139] "The Huma, a bird peculiar to the East. It is supposed to fly
constantly in the air, and never touch the ground; it is looked upon as a
bird of happy omen; and that every head it overshades will in time wear a
crown."--_Richardson_.

In the terms of alliance made by Fuzel Oola Khan with Hyder in 1760, one
of the stipulations was, "that he should have the distinction of two
honorary attendants standing behind him, holding fans composed of the
feathers of the humma, according to the practice of his family."--
_Wilks's_ South of India. He adds in a note;--"The Humma is a fabulous
bird. The head over which its shadow once passes will assuredly be circled
with a crown. The splendid little bird suspended over the throne of Tippoo
Sultaun, found at Seringapatam in 1799, was intended to represent this
poetical fancy."

[140] "To the pilgrims to Mount Sinai we must attribute the inscriptions,
figures, etc., on those rocks, which have from thence acquired the name of
the Written Mountain."--_Volney_.

M. Gebelin and others have been at much pains to attach some mysterious
and important meaning to these inscriptions; but Niebuhr, as well as
Volney, thinks that they must have been executed at idle hours by the
travellers to Mount Sinai, "who were satisfied with cutting the unpolished
rock with any pointed instrument; adding to their names and the date of
their journeys some rude figures, which bespeak the hand of a people but
little skilled in the arts."--_Niebuhr_.

[141] The Story of Sinbad.

[142] "The Cmalat (called by Linnaeus, Ipomaea) is the most beautiful of
its order, both in the color and form of its leaves and flowers; its
elegant blossoms are 'celestial rosy red, Love's proper hue,' and have
justly procured is the name of Cmalat, or Love's creeper."--_Sir W.
Jones_.

[143] "According to Father Premare, in his tract on Chinese Mythology, the
mother of Fo-hi was the daughter of heaven, surnamed Flower-loving; and as
the nymph was walking alone on the bank of a river, she found herself
encircled by a rainbow, after which she became pregnant, and, at the end
of twelve years, was delivered of a son radiant as herself."--_Asiat.
Res_.

[144] "Numerous small islands emerge from the Lake of Cashmere. One is
called Char Chenaur, from the plane trees upon it.--_Foster_.

[145] "The Altan Kol or Golden River of Tibet, which runs into the Lakes
of Sing-su-hay, has abundance of gold in its sands, which employs the
inhabitants all the summer in gathering it."--_Description of Tibet in
Pinkerton_.

[146] "The Brahmins of this province insist that the blue campac flowers
only in Paradise."--_Sir W. Jones_. It appears, however, from a curious
letter of the Sultan of Menangeabow, given by Marsden, that one place on
earth may lay claim to the possession of it. "This is the Sultan, who
keeps the flower champaka that is blue, and to be found in no other
country but his, being yellow elsewhere."--_Marsden's_ Sumatra.

[147] "The Mahometans suppose that falling stars are the firebrands
wherewith the good angels drive away the bad, when they approach too near
the empyrean or verge or the heavens."--_Fryer_.

[148] The Forty Pillars; so the Persians call the ruins of Persepolis. It
is imagined by them that this palace and the edifices at Balbec were built
by Genii, for the purpose of hiding in their subterraneous caverns immense
treasures, which still remain there.--_D'Herbelot, Volney_.

[149] _Diodorus_ mentions the Isle of Panchai, to the south of Arabia
Felix, where there was a temple of Jupiter. This island, or rather cluster
of isles, has disappeared, "sunk [says _Grandpr_] in the abyss made by
the fire beneath their foundations."--_Voyage to the Indian Ocean_.

[150] The Isles of Panchaia.

[151] "The cup of Jamshid, discovered, they say, when digging for the
foundations of Persepolis."-_Richardson_.

[152] "It is not like the Sea of India, whose bottom is rich with pearls
and ambergris, whose mountains of the coast are stored with gold and
precious stones, whose gulfs breed creatures that yield ivory, and among
the plants of whose shores are ebony, red wood, and the wood of Hairzan,
aloes, camphor, cloves, sandal-wood, and all other spices and aromatics;
where parrots and peacocks are birds of the forest, and musk and civit are
collected upon the lands."--_Travels of Two Mohammedans_.

[153] "With this immense treasure Mamood returned to Ghizni and in the
year 400 prepared a magnificent festival, where he displayed to the people
his wealth in golden thrones and in other ornaments, in a great plain
without the city of Ghizni." _Ferishta_.

[154] "Mahmood of Gazna, or Chizni, who conquered India in the beginning
of the 11th century."--See his History in _Dow_ and Sir _J. Malcolm_.

[155] "It is reported that the hunting equipage of the Sultan Mahmood was
so magnificent, that he kept 400 greyhounds and bloodhounds each of which
wore a collar set with jewels and a covering edged with gold and
pearls."--_Universal History_, vol. iii.

[156] "The Mountains of the Moon, or the _Montes Lunae_ of antiquity, at
the foot of which the Nile is supposed to arise."--_Bruce_.

[157] "The Nile, which the Abyssinians know by the names of Abey and Alawy
or the Giant."--_Asiat. Research_. vol. i. p. 387.

[158] See Perry's View of the Levant for an account of the sepulchres in
Upper Thebes, and the numberless grots, covered all over with
hieroglyphics in the mountains of Upper Egypt.

[159] "The orchards of Rosetta are filled with turtle-doves.--_Sonnini_.

[160] Savary mentions the pelicans upon Lake Moeris.

[161] "The superb date-tree, whose head languidly reclines, like that of a
handsome woman overcome with sleep."--_Dafard el Hadad_.

[162] "That beautiful bird, with plumage of the finest shining blue, with
purple beak and legs, the natural and living ornament of the temples and
palaces of the Greeks and Romans, which, from the stateliness of its part,
as well as the brilliancy of its colors, has obtained the title of
Sultana,"--_Sonnini_.

[163] Jackson, speaking of the plague that occurred in West Barbary, when
he was there, says, "The birds of the air fled away from the abodes of
men. The hyaenas, on the contrary, visited the cemeteries," etc.

[164] "Gondar was full of hyaenas from the time it turned dark, till the
dawn of day, seeking the different pieces of slaughtered carcasses, which
this cruel and unclean people expose in the streets without burial, and
who firmly believe that these animals are Falashta from the neighboring
mountains, transformed by magic, and come down to eat human flesh in the
dark in safety."--_Bruce_.

[165] "In the East, they suppose the Phoenix to have fifty orifices in his
bill, which are continued to his tail; and that, after living one thousand
years, he builds himself a funeral pile, sings a melodious air of
different harmonies through his fifty organ pipes, flaps his wings with a
velocity which sets fire to the wood and consumes himself."--_Richardson_.

[166] "On the shores of a quadrangular lake stand a thousand goblets, made
of stars, out of which souls predestined to enjoy felicity drink the
crystal wave."--From _Chateaubriand's_ Description of the Mahometan
Paradise, in his _"Beauties of Christianity_."

[167] Richardson thinks that Syria had its name from Suri, a beautiful and
delicate species of rose, for which that country has always been
famous;--hence, Suristan, the Land of Roses.

[168] "The number of lizards I saw one day in the great court of the
Temple of the Sun at Balbec amounted to many thousands; the ground, the
walls, and stones of the ruined buildings, were covered with
them."--_Bruce_.

[169] "The Syrinx or Pan's pipes is still a pastoral instrument in
Syria."--_Russel_.

[170] "Wild bees, frequent in Palestine, in hollow trunks or branches of
trees, and the clefts of rocks. Thus it is said (Psalm lxxxi.), _'honey
out of the stony rock.'_"--_Burder's_ Oriental Customs.

[171] "The River Jordan is on both sides beset with little, thick, and
pleasant woods, among which thousands of nightingales warble all
together."_--Thevenot_.

[172] The Temple of the Sun at Balbec.

[173] "You behold there a considerable number of a remarkable species of
beautiful insects, the elegance of whose appearance and their attire
procured for them the name of Damsels.--_Sonnini_.

[174] "Such Turks as at the common hours of prayer are on the road, or so
employed as not to find convenience to attend the mosques, are still
obliged to execute that duty; nor are they ever known to fail, whatever
business they are then about, but pray immediately when the hour alarms
them, whatever they are about, in that very place they chance to stand on;
insomuch that when a janissary, whom you have to guard you up and down the
city, hears the notice which is given him from the steeples, he will turn
about, stand still, and beckon with his hand, to tell his charge he must
have patience for awhile; when, taking out his handkerchief, he spreads it
on the ground, sits cross-legged thereupon, and says his prayers, though
in the open market, which, having ended he leaps briskly up, salutes the
person whom he undertook to convey, and renews his journey with the mild
expression of _Ghell yelinnum ghell_, or Come, dear, follow me."--_Aaron
Hill's_ Travels.

[175] The Nucta, Or Miraculous Drop, which falls in Egypt precisely on St.
John's day in June and is supposed to have the effect of stopping the
plague.

[176] The Country of Delight--the name of a province in the kingdom of
Jinnistan, or Fairy Land, the capital of which is called the City of
Jewels. Amberabad is another of the cities of Jinnistan.

[177] The tree Tooba, that stands in Paradise, in the palace of Mahomet.
See _Sale's Prelim. Disc_.--Tooba, says _D'Herbelot_, signifies beatitude,
or eternal happiness.

[178] Mahomet is described, in the 53d chapter of the Koran, as having
seen the Angel Gabriel "by the lote-tree, beyond which there is no
passing: near it is the Garden of Eternal Abode." This tree, say the
commentators, stands in the seventh Heaven, on the right hand of the
Throne of God.

[179] "It is said that the rivers or streams of Basra were reckoned in the
time of Peisl ben Abi Bordeh, and amounted to the number of one hundred
and twenty thousand streams."--_Ebn Haukal_.

[180] The name of the javelin with which the Easterns exercise. See
_Castellan, "Moeurs des Ottomans," tom_. iii. p. 161.

[181] "This account excited a desire of visiting the Banyan Hospital, as I
had heard much of their benevolence to all kinds of animals that were
either sick, lame, or infirm, through age or accident. On my arrival,
there were presented to my view many horses, cows, and oxen, in one
apartment; in another, dogs, sheep, goats, and monkeys, with clean straw
for them to repose on. Above stairs were depositories for seeds of many
sorts, and flat, broad dishes for water, for the use of birds and
insects."--_Parson_'s Travels. It is said that all animals know the
Banyans, that the most timid approach them, and that birds will fly nearer
to them than to other people.--See _Grandpr_.

[182] "A very fragrant grass from the banks of the Ganges, near Heridwar,
which in some places covers whole acres, and diffuses, when crushed, a
strong odor."--_Sir W. Jones_ on the Spikenard of the Ancients.

[183] "Near this is a curious hill, called Koh Talism, the Mountain of the
Talisman, because, according to the traditions of the country, no person
ever succeeded in gaining its summit."--_Kinneir_.

[184] "The Arabians believe that the ostriches hatch their young by only
looking at them."

[185] Oriental Tales.

[186] Ferishta. "Or rather," says _Scott_, upon the passage of Ferishta,
from which this is taken, "small coins, stamped with the figure of a
flower. They are still used in India to distribute in charity and on
occasion thrown by the purse-bearers of the great among the populace."

[187] The fine road made by the Emperor Jehan-Guire from Agra to Lahore,
planted with trees on each side. This road is 250 leagues in length. It
has "little pyramids or turrets," says _Bernier_, "erected every half
league, to mark the ways, and frequent wells to afford drink to
passengers, and to water the young trees."

[188] The Baya, or Indian Grosbeak.--_Sir W. Jones_.

[189] "Here is a large pagoda by a tank, on the water of which float
multitudes of the beautiful red lotus: the flower is larger than that of
the white water-lily, and is the most lovely of the nymphaeas I have
seen."--_Mrs. Graham's_ Journal of a Residence in India.

[190] "Cashmere (says its historian) had its own princes 4000 years before
its conquest by Akbar in 1585. Akbar would have found some difficulty to
reduce this paradise of the Indies, situated as it is within such a
fortress of mountains, but its monarch, Yusef-Khan, was basely betrayed by
his Omrahs."--_Pennant_.

[191] Voltaire tells us that in his tragedy, "_Les Gubres_," he was
generally supposed to have alluded to the Jansenists. I should not be
surprised if this story of the Fire worshippers were found capable of a
similar doubleness of application.

[192] The Persian Gulf, sometimes so called, which separates the shores of
Persia and Arabia.

[193] The present Gombaroon, a town on the Persian side of the Gulf.

[194] A Moorish instrument of music.

[195] "At Gombaroon and other places in Persia, they have towers for the
purpose of catching the wind and cooling the houses.--_Le Bruyn_.

[196] "Iran is the true general name for the empire of Persia.--_Asiat.
Res. Disc. 5_.

[197] "On the blades of their scimitars some verse from the Koran is
usually inscribed.--_Russel_.

[198] There is a kind of Rhododendros about Trebizond, whose flowers the
bee feeds upon, and the honey thence drives people mad;"--_Tournefort_.

[199] Their kings wear plumes of black herons' feathers, upon the right
side, as a badge of sovereignty "--_Hanway_.

[200] "The Fountain of Youth, by a Mahometan tradition, is situated in
some dark region of the East."--_Richardson_.

[201] Arabia Felix.

[202] "In the midst of the garden is the chiosk, that is, a large room,
commonly beautified with a fine fountain in the midst of it. It is raised
nine or ten steps, and enclosed with gilded lattices, round which vines,
jessamines, and honeysuckles, make a sort of green wall; large trees are
planted round this place, which is the scene of their greatest
pleasures."--_Lady M. W. Montagu_.

[203] The women of the East are never without their looking-glasses. "In
Barbary," says _Shaw_, "they are so fond of their looking-glasses, which
they hang upon their breasts, that they will not lay them aside, even when
after the drudgery of the day they are obliged to go two or three miles
with a pitcher or a goat's skin to fetch water."--_Travels_.

[204] "They say that if a snake or serpent fix his eyes on the lustre of
those stones (emeralds), he immediately becomes blind."--_Ahmed ben
Abdalaziz_, Treatise on Jewels.

[205] "At Gombaroon and the Isle of Ormus, it is sometimes so hot, that
the people are obliged to lie all day in the water."--_Marco Polo_.

[206] This mountain is generally supposed to be inaccessible. _Struy_
says, "I can well assure the reader that their opinion is not true, who
suppose this mount to be inaccessible." He adds, that "the lower part of
the mountain is cloudy, misty, and dark, the middlemost part very cold,
and like clouds of snow, but the upper regions perfectly calm."--It was on
this mountain that the Ark was supposed to have rested after the Deluge,
and part of it, they say, exists there still, which Struy thus gravely
accounts for:--"Whereas none can remember that the air on the top of the
hill did ever change or was subject either to wind or rain, which is
presumed to be the reason that the Ark has endured so long without being
rotten."--See _Carreri's_ Travels, where the Doctor laughs at this whole
account of Mount Ararat.

[207] In one of the books of the Shh Nmeh, when Zal (a celebrated hero
of Persia, remarkable for his white hair,) comes to the terrace of his
mistress Rodahver at night, she lets down her long tresses to assist him
in his ascent;--he, however, manages it in a less romantic way by fixing
his crook in a projecting beam.--See _Champion's_ Ferdosi.

[208] "On the lofty hills of Arabia Petraea, are rock-goats."--_Niebuhr_.

[209] "They (the Ghebers) lay so much stress on their cushee or girdle, as
not to dare to be an instant without it."--_Grose's_ Voyage.

[210] "They suppose the Throne of the Almighty is seated in the sun, and
hence their worship of that luminary."--_Hanway_.

[211] The Mameluks that were in the other boat, when it was dark used to
shoot up a sort of fiery arrows into the air which in some measure
resembled lightning or falling stars."--_Baumgarten_.

[212] "Within the enclosure which surrounds his monument (at Gualior) is a
small tomb to the memory of Tan-Sein, a musician of incomparable skill,
who flourished at the court of Akbar. The tomb is overshadowed by a tree,
concerning which a superstitious notion prevails, that the chewing of its
leaves will give an extraordinary melody to the voice."--_Narrative of a
Journey from Agra to Ouzein, by W. Hunter,  Esq_.

[213] "It is usual to place a small white triangular flag, fixed to a
bamboo staff of ten or twelve feet long, at the place where a tiger has
destroyed a man. It is common for the passengers also to throw each a
stone or brick near the spot, so that in the course of a little time a
pile equal to a good wagon-load is collected. The sight of these flags and
piles of stones imparts a certain melancholy, not perhaps altogether void
of apprehension."--_Oriental Field Sports_, vol. ii.

[214] "The Ficus Indica is called the Pagod Tree of Councils; the first,
from the idols placed under its shade; the second, because meetings were
held under its cool branches. In some places it is believed to be the
haunt of spectres, as the ancient spreading oaks of Wales have been of
fairies; in others are erected beneath the shade pillars of stone, or
posts, elegantly carved, and ornamented with the most beautiful porcelain
to supply the use of mirrors."--_Pennant_.

[215] The Persian Gulf.--"To dive for pearls in the Green Sea, or Persian
Gulf."--_Sir W. Jones_.

[216] Or Selemeh, the genuine name of the headland at the entrance of the
Gulf, commonly called Cape Musseldom. "The Indians when they pass the
promontory throw cocoa-nuts, fruits, or flowers into the sea to secure a
propitious voyage."--_Morier_.

[217] "The nightingale sings from the pomegranate-groves in the daytime
and from the loftiest trees at night."--_Russel's_ "Aleppo."

[218] In speaking of the climate of Shiraz, Francklin says, "The dew is of
such a pure nature, that if the brightest scimitar should be exposed to it
all night, it would not receive the least rust."

[219] The place where the Persians were finally defeated by the Arabs, and
their ancient monarchy destroyed.

[220] The Talpot or Talipot tree. "This beautiful palm-tree, which grows
in the heart of the forests, may be classed among the loftiest trees, and
becomes still higher when on the point of bursting forth from its leafy
summit. The sheath which then envelopes the flower is very large, and,
when it bursts, makes an explosion like the report of a cannon."--
_Thunberg_.

[221] "When the bright scimitars make the eyes of our heroes wink."--_The
Moallakat, Poem of Amru_.

[222] Tahmuras, and other ancient Kings of Persia; whose adventures in
Fairy-land among the Peris and Divs may be found in Richardson's curious
Dissertation. The griffin Simoorgh, they say, took some feathers from her
breast for Tahmuras, with which he adorned his helmet, and transmitted
them afterwards to his descendants.

[223] This rivulet, says Dandini, is called the Holy River from the
"cedar-saints" among which it rises.

[224] This mountain is my own creation, as the "stupendous chain," of
which I suppose it a link, does not extend quite so far as the shores of
the Persian Gulf.

[225] These birds sleep in the air. They are most common about the Cape of
Good Hope.

[226] "There is an extraordinary hill in this neighborhood, called Koh
Gubr, or the Guebre's mountain. It rises in the form of a lofty cupola,
and on the summit of it, they say, are the remains of an Atush Kudu or
Fire Temple. It is superstitiously held to be the residence or Deeves or
Sprites, and many marvellous stories are recounted of the injury and
witchcraft suffered by those who essayed in former days to ascend or
explore it."--_Pottinger's_ "Beloochistan."

[227] The Ghebers generally built their temples over subterraneous fires.

[228] "At the city of Yezd, in Persia, which is distinguished by the
appellation of the Darub Abadut, or Seat of Religion, the Guebres are
permitted to have an Atush Kudu or Fire Temple (which, they assert, has
had the sacred fire in it since the days of Zoroaster) in their own
compartment of the city; but for this indulgence they are indebted to the
avarice, not the tolerance of the Persian government, which taxes them at
twenty-five rupees each man."--_Pottinger's_ "Beloochistan."

[229] Ancient heroes of Persia. "Among the Guebres there are some who
boast their descent from Rustam."--_Stephen's Persia_.

[230] See Russel's account of the panther's attacking travellers in the
night on the sea-shore about the roots of Lebanon.

[231] "Among other ceremonies the Magi used to place upon the tops of high
towers various kinds of rich viands, upon which it was supposed the Peris
and the spirits of their departed heroes regaled themselves."--
_Richardson_.

[232] In the ceremonies of the Ghebers round their Fire, as described by
Lord, "the Daroo," he says, "giveth them water to drink, and a pomegranate
leaf to chew in the mouth, to cleanse them from inward uncleanness."

[233] "Early in the morning, they (the Parsees or Ghebers at Oulam) go in
crowds to pay their devotions to the Sun, to whom upon all the altars
there are spheres consecrated, made by magic, resembling the circles of
the sun, and when the sun rises, these orbs seem to be inflamed, and to
turn round with a great noise. They have every one a censer in their
hands, and offer incense to the sun.'--_Rabbi Benjamin_.

[234] A vivid verdure succeeds the autumnal rains, and the ploughed fields
are covered with the Persian lily, of a resplendent yellow color."--
_Russel's_ "Aleppo."

[235] It is observed, with respect to the Sea of Herkend, that when it is
tossed by tempestuous winds it sparkles like fire."--_Travels of Two
Mohammedans_.

[236] A kind of trumpet;--it "was that used by Tamerlane, the sound of
which is described as uncommonly dreadful, and so loud as to be heard at a
distance of several miles."--_Richardson_.

[237] "Mohammed had two helmets, an interior and exterior one; the latter
of which, called Al Mawashah, the fillet, wreath, or wreathed garland, he
wore at the battle of Ohod."--_Universal History_.

[238] "They say that there are apple-trees upon the sides of this sea,
which bear very lovely fruit, but within are all full of ashes."--
_Thevenot_.

[239] "The Suhrab or Water of the Desert is said to be caused by the
rarefaction of the atmosphere from extreme heat; and, which augments the
delusion, it is most frequent in hollows, where water might be expected to
lodge. I have seen bushes and trees reflected in it, with as much accuracy
is though it had been the face of a clear and still lake."--_Pottinger_.

[240] "A wind which prevails in February, called Bidmusk, from a small and
odoriferous flower of that name."--"The wind which blows these flowers
commonly lasts till the end of the month."--_Le Bruyn_.

[241] "The Biajs are of two races: the one is settled on Borneo, and are
a rude but warlike and industrious nation, who reckon themselves the
original possessors of the island of Borneo. The other is a species of
sea-gypsies or itinerant fishermen, who live in small covered boats, and
enjoy a perpetual summer on the eastern ocean, shifting to leeward from
island to island, with the variations of the monsoon.

[242] "The sweet-scented violet is one of the plants most esteemed,
particularly for its great use in Sorbet, which they make of violet
sugar."--_Hassequist_.

[243] "Last of all she took a guitar, and sang a pathetic air in the
measure called Nava, which is always used to express the lamentations of
absent lovers."--_Persian Tales_.

[244] "The Easterns used to set out on their longer voyages with
music."--_Harmer_.

[245] "The Gate of Tears, the straits or passage into the Red Sea,
commonly called Babelmandel. It received this name from the old Arabians,
on account of the danger of the navigation and the number of shipwrecks by
which it was distinguished; which induced them to consider as dead, and to
wear mourning for all who had the boldness to hazard the passage through
it into the Ethiopic ocean."--_Richardson_.

[246] "I have been told that whensoever an animal falls down dead, one or
more vultures, unseen before, instantly appears."--_Pennant_.

[247] "They fasten some writing to the wings of a Bagdat, or Babylonian
pigeon."--_Travels of certain Englishmen_.

[248] "The Empress of Jehan-Guire used to divert herself with feeding tame
fish in her canals, some of which were many years afterwards known by
fillets of gold, which she caused to be put round them."--_Harris_.

[249] The meteors that Pliny calls "_faces_."

[250] "The brilliant Canopus, unseen in European climates."--_Brown_.

[251] A precious stone of the Indies, called by the ancients, Ceraunium,
because it was supposed to be found in places where thunder had fallen.
Tertullian says it has a glittering appearance, as if there had fire in
it; and the author of the Dissertation of Harris's Voyages, supposes it to
be the opal.

[252] "The Guebres are known by a dark yellow color, which the men affect
in their clothes."--_Thevenot_.

[253] "The Kolah, or cap, worn by the Persians, is made of the skin of the
sheep of Tartary."--_Waring_.

[254] A frequent image among the oriental poets. "The nightingales warbled
their enchanting notes, and rent the thin veils of the rose-bud, and the
rose."--_Jami_.

[255] "Blossoms of the sorrowful Nyctanthes give a durable color to
silk."--_Remarks on the Husbandry of Bengal_, p. 200. Nilica is one of the
Indian names of this flower.--_Sir W. Jones_. The Persians call it
Gul.--Carreri.

[256] "In parts of Kerman, whatever dates are shaken from the trees by the
wind they do not touch, but leave them for those who have not any, or for
travellers.--Ebn Haukal.

[257] The two terrible angels, Monkir and Nakir, who are called "the
Searchers of the Grave" in the "Creed of the orthodox Mahometans" given by
Ockley, vol. ii.

[258] "The Arabians call the mandrake 'the devil's candle,' on account of
its shining appearance in the night."--_Richardson_.

[259] For an account of Ishmonie, the petrified city in Upper Egypt, where
it is said there are many statues of men, women, etc., to be seen to this
day, see _Perry's "Views of the Levant_."

[260] Jesus.

[261] The Ghebers say that when Abraham, their great Prophet, was thrown
into the fire by order of Nimrod, the flame turned instantly into "a bed
of roses, where the child sweetly reposed."--_Tavernier_.

[262] "The shell called Siiankos, common to India, Africa, and the
Mediterranean, and still used in many parts as a trumpet for blowing
alarms or giving signals: it sends forth a deep and hollow sound."--
_Pennant_.

[263] "The finest ornament for the horses is made of six large flying
tassels of long white hair, taken out of the tails of wild oxen, that are
to be found in some places of the Indies."--_Thevenot_.

[264] "The angel Israfll, who has the most melodious voice of all God's
creatures."--_Sale_.

[265] "In this thicket upon the banks of the Jordan several sorts of wild
beasts are wont to harbor themselves, whose being washed out of the covert
by the overflowings of the river, gave occasion to that allusion of
Jeremiah, _he shall come up like a lion from the smelling of
Jordan_."--_Maundrell's "Aleppo."_

[266] "This wind (the Samoor) so softens the strings of lutes, that they
can never be tuned while it lasts."--_Stephen's Persia_.

[267] "One of the greatest curiosities found in the Persian Gulf is a fish
which the English call Star-fish. It is circular, and at night very
luminous, resembling the full moon surrounded by rays."--_Mirza Abu
Taleb_.

[268] Some naturalists have imagined that amber is a concretion of the
tears of birds.--See _Trevoux, Chambers_.

[269] "The bay Kieselarke, which is otherwise called the Golden Bay, the
sand whereof shines as fire."--_Struy_.

[270] "The application of whips or rods."--_Dubois_.

[271] Kempfer mentions such an officer among the attendants of the King of
Persia, and calls him "_formae corporis estimator_." His business was, at
stated periods, to measure the ladies of the Haram by a sort of
regulation-girdle whose limits it was not thought graceful to exceed. If
any of them outgrew this standard of shape, they were reduced by
abstinence till they came within proper bounds.

[272] "Akbar on his way ordered a fort to be built upon the Nilab, which
he called Attock, which means in the Indian language Forbidden; for, by
the superstition of the Hindoos, it was held unlawful to cross that
river."--_Dow's_ Hindostan.

[273] "The inhabitants of this country (Zinge) are never afflicted with
sadness or melancholy; on this subject the Sheikh _Abu-al-Kheir-Azhari_
has the following distich:--

"'Who is the man without care or sorrow, (tell) that I may rub my hand to
him.

"'(Behold) the Zingians, without care and sorrow, frolicsome with
tipsiness and mirth.'"

[274] The star Soheil, or Canopus.

[275] "The lizard Stellio. The Arabs call it Hardun. The Turks kill it,
for they imagine that by declining the head it mimics them when they say
their prayers."--_Hasselquist_.

[276] "As you enter at that Bazar, without the gate of Damascus, you see
the Green Mosque, so called because it hath a steeple faced with green
glazed bricks, which render it very resplendent: It is covered at top with
a pavilion of the same stuff. The Turks say this mosque was made in that
place, because Mahomet being come so far, would not enter the town, saying
it was too delicious."--_Thevenot_.

[277] Nourmahal signifies Light of the Haram. She was afterwards called
Nourjehan, or the Light of the World.

[278] "The rose of Kashmire for its brilliancy and delicacy of odor has
long been proverbial in the East."--Foster.

[279] "Tied round her waist the zone of bells, that sounded with ravishing
melody."--_Song of Jayadeva_.

[280] "The little isles in the Lake of Cachemire are set with arbors and
large-leaved aspen-trees, slender and tall."--_Bernier_.

[281] "The Tuckt Suliman, the name bestowed by the Mahommetans on this
hill, forms one side of a grand portal to the Lake."--_Forster_.

[282] "The Feast of Roses continues the whole time of their remaining in
bloom."--See _Pietro de la Valle_.

[283] "Gul sad berk, the Rose of a hundred leaves. I believe a particular
species."--_Ouseley_.

[284] A place mentioned in the Toozek Jehangeery, or Memoirs of Jehan-
Guire, where there is an account of the beds of saffron-flowers about
Cashmere.

[285] "It is the custom among the women to employ the Maazeen to chant
from the gallery of the nearest minaret, which on that occasion is
illuminated, and the women assembled at the house respond at intervals
with a ziraleet or joyous chorus."--_Russel_.

[286] "The swing is a favorite pastime in the East, as promoting a
circulation of air, extremely refreshing in those sultry climates."--
_Richardson_.

[287] At the keeping of the Feast of Roses we beheld an infinite number of
tents pitched, with such a crowd of men, women, boys, and girls, with
music, dances, etc."--_Herbert_.

[288] "An old commentator of the Chou-King says, the ancients having
remarked that a current of water made some of the stones near its banks
send forth a sound, they detached some of them, and being charmed with the
delightful sound they emitted, constructed King or musical instruments of
them,"--_Grosier_.

[289] In the wars of the Divs with the Peris, whenever the former took the
latter prisoners, "they shut them up in iron cages, and hung them on the
highest trees. Here they were visited by their companions, who brought
them the choicest odors."--_Richardson_.

[290] In the Malay language the same word signifies women and flowers.

[291] The capital of Shadukiam.

[292] "Among the birds of Tonquin is a species of goldfinch, which sings
so melodiously that it is called the Celestial Bird. Its wings, when it is
perched, appear variegated with beautiful colors, but when it flies they
lose all their splendor."--_Grosier_.

[293] "As these birds on the Bosphorus are never known to rest, they are
called by the French '_les mes damnes_.'"--_Dalloway_.

[294] "You may place a hundred handfuls of fragrant herbs and flowers
before the nightingale, yet he wishes not in his constant heart for more
than the sweet breath of his beloved rose."--_Jami_.

[295] "He is said to have found the great _Mantra_, spell or talisman,
through which he ruled over the elements and spirits of all
denominations."--_Wilford_.

[296] "The gold jewels of Jinnie, which are called by the Arabs El Herrez,
from the supposed charm they contain."--_Jackson_.

[297] "A demon, supposed to haunt woods, etc., in a human shape."--
_Richardson_.

[298] The name of Jehan-Guire before his accession to the throne.

[299] "Hemasagara, or the Sea of Gold, with flowers of the brightest gold
color."--_Sir W. Jones_.

[300] "This tree (the Nagacesara) is one of the most delightful on earth,
and the delicious odor of its blossoms justly gives them a place in the
quiver of Camadeva, or the God of Love."--_Id_.

[301] "The Malayans style the tuberose (_polianthes tuberosa_) Sandal
Malam, or the Mistress of the Night."--_Pennant_.

[302] The people of the Batta country in Sumatra (of which Zamara is one
of the ancient names), "when not engaged in war, lead an idle, inactive
life, passing the day in playing on a kind of flute, crowned with garlands
of flowers, among which the globe-amaranthus, a native of the country,
mostly prevails,"--_Marsden_.

[303] "The largest and richest sort (of the Jambu or rose-apple) is called
Amrita, or immortal, and the mythologists of Tibet apply the same word to
a celestial tree, bearing ambrosial fruit."--_Sir W. Jones_.

[304] Sweet Basil, called Rayhan in Persia, and generally found in
churchyards.

[305] "In the Great Desert are found many stalks of lavender and
rosemary."--_Asiat. Res_.

[306] "The almond-tree, with white flowers, blossoms on the bare
branches."--_Hasselquist_.

[307] An herb on Mount Libanus, which is said to communicate a yellow
golden hue to the teeth of the goat and other animals that graze upon it.

[308] The myrrh country.

[309] "This idea (of deities living in shells) was not unknown to the
Greeks, who represent the young Nerites, one of the Cupids, as living in
shells on the shores of the Red Sea."--_Wilford_.

[310] "A fabulous fountain, where instruments are said to be constantly
playing."--_Richardson_.

[311] "The Pompadour pigeon is the species, which, by carrying the fruit
of the cinnamon to different places, is a great disseminator of this
valuable tree."--See _Brown's_ Illustr. Tab. 19.

[312] "The Persians have two mornings, the Soobhi Kazim and the Soobhi
Sadig, the false and the real daybreak. They account for this phenomenon
in a most whimsical manner. They say that as the sun rises from behind the
Kohi Qaf (Mount Caucasus), it passes a hole perforated through that
mountain, and that darting its rays through it, it is the cause of the
Soobhi Kazim, or this temporary appearance of daybreak. As it ascends, the
earth is again veiled in darkness, until the sun rises above the mountain,
and brings with it the Soobhi Sadig, or real morning."--_Scott Waring_.

[313] "In the centre of the plain, as it approaches the Lake, one of the
Delhi Emperors, I believe Shan Jehan, constructed a spacious garden called
the Shalimar, which is abundantly stored with fruit-trees and flowering
shrubs. Some of the rivulets which intersect the plain are led into a
canal at the back of the garden, and flowing through its centre, or
occasionally thrown into a variety of water-works, compose the chief
beauty of the Shalimar."--_Forster_.

[314] "The waters of Cachemir are the more renowned from its being
supposed that the Cachemirians are indebted for their beauty to
them."--_Ali Yezdi_.

[315] "From him I received the following little Gazzel, or Love Song, the
notes of which he committed to paper from the voice of one of those
singing girls of Cashmere, who wander from that delightful valley over the
various parts of India."--_Persian Miscellanies_.

[316] "The roses of the Jinan Nile, or Garden of the Nile (attached to the
Emperor of Morocco's palace) are unequalled, and mattresses are made of
their leaves for the men of rank to recline upon."--_Jackson_.

[317] "On the side of a mountain near Paphos there is a cavern which
produces the most beautiful rock-crystal. On account of its brilliancy it
has been called the Paphian diamond."--_Mariti_.

[318] "These is a part of Candahar, called Peria, or Fairy Land."--
_Thevenot_. In some of those countries to the north of India vegetable
gold is supposed to be produced.

[319] "These are the butterflies which are called in the Chinese language
Flying Leaves. Some of them have such shining colors, and are so
variegated, that they may be called flying flowers; and indeed they are
always produced in the finest flower-gardens."--_Dunn_.

[320] "The Arabian women wear black masks with little clasps prettily
ordered."--_Carreri_. Niebuhr mentions their showing but one eye in
conversation.

[321] "The golden grapes of Casbin."--_Description of Persia_.

[322] "The fruits exported from Caubul are apples, pears, pomegranates,"
etc.--_Elphinstone_.

[323] "We sat down under a tree, listened to the birds, and talked with
the son of our Mehmaundar about our country and Caubul, of which he gave
an enchanting account; that city and its 100,000 gardens," etc.--_Ib_.

[324] "The mangusteen, the most delicate fruit in the world; the pride of
the Malay islands."--_Marsden_.

[325] "A delicious kind of apricot, called by the Persians tokmekshems,
signifying sun's seed."--_Description of Persia_.

[326] "Sweetmeats, in a crystal cup, consisting of rose-leaves in
conserve, with Iemon of Visna cherry, orange flowers," etc.--_Russel_.

[327] "Antelopes cropping the fresh berries of Erac."--The _Moallakat_,
Poem of Tarafa.

[328] "Mauri-ga-Sima, an island near Formosa, supposed to have been sunk
in the sea for the crimes of its inhabitants. The vessels which the
fishermen and divers bring up from it are sold at an immense price in
China and Japan."--See _Kempfer_.

[329] Persian Tales.

[330] The white wine of Kishma.

[331] "The King of Zeilan is said to have the very finest ruby that was
ever seen. Kublai-Khan sent and offered the value of a city for It, but
the king answered he would not give it for the treasure of the
world."--_Marco Polo_.

[332] The Indians feign that Cupid was first seen floating down the Ganges
on the Nymphaea Nelumbo.--See _Pennant_.

[333] Teflis is celebrated for its natural warm baths.--See _Ebn Haukal_.

[334] "The Indian Syrinda, or guitar."--_Symez_.

[335] "Around the exterior of the Dewan Khafs (a building of Shah Allum's)
in the cornice are the following lines in letters of gold upon a ground of
white marble--'_If there be a paradise upon earth, it is this, it is
this.'"--Franklin_.

[336] "Delightful are the flowers of the Amra trees on the mountain tops
while the murmuring bees pursue their voluptuous toil."--_Song of
Jayadera_.

[337] "The Nison or drops of spring rain, which they believe to produce
pearls if they fall into shells."--_Richardson_.

[338] For an account of the share which wine had in the fall of the
angels, see _Mariti_.

[339] The Angel of Music.

[340] The Hudhud, or Lapwing, is supposed to have the power of discovering
water under ground.

[341] "The Chinese had formerly the art of painting on the sides of
porcelain vessels fish and other animals, which were only perceptible when
the vessel was full of some liquor, They call this species Kia-tsin, that
is, _azure is put in press_, on account of the manner in which the azure
is laid on."--"They are every now and then trying to discover the art of
this magical painting, but to no purpose."--_Dunn_.

[342] An eminent carver of idols, said in the Koran to be father to
Abraham. "I have such a lovely idol as is not to be met with in the house
of Azor."--_Hafiz_.

[343] Kachmire be Nazeer.--_Forster_.

[344] Jehan-Guire mentions "a fountain in Cashmere called Tirnagh, which
signifies a snake; probably because some large snake had formerly been
seen there."--"During the lifetime of my father, I went twice to this
fountain, which is about twenty coss from the city of Cashmere. The
vestiges of places of worship and sanctity are to be traced without number
amongst the ruins and the caves which are interspersed in its
neighborhood."--_Toozek Jehangeery_.--v. _Asiat. Misc_. vol. ii.

[345] "On a standing roof of wood is laid a covering of fine earth, which
shelters the building from the great quantity of snow that falls in the
winter season. This fence communicates an equal warmth in winter, as a
refreshing coolness in the summer season, when the tops of the houses,
which are planted with a variety of flowers, exhibit at a distance the
spacious view of a beautifully checkered parterre."--_Forster_.

[346] "Two hundred slaves there are, who have no other office than to hunt
the woods and marshes for triple-colored tortoises for the King's Vivary.
Of the shells of these also lanterns are made."--_Vincent le Blanc's_
Travels.

[347] This wind, which is to blow from Syria Damascena, is, according to
the Mahometans, one of the signs of the Last Day's approach.

Another of the signs is, "Great distress in the world, so that a man when
he passes by another's grave shall say, Would to God I were in his
place!"--_Sale's_ Preliminary Discourse.

[348] "On Mahommed Shaw's return to Koolburga (the capital of Dekkan), he
made a great festival, and mounted this throne with much pomp and
magnificence, calling it Firozeh or Cerulean. I have heard some old
persons, who saw the throne Firozeh in the reign of Sultan Mamood
Bhamenee, describe it. They say that it was in length nine feet, and three
in breadth; made of ebony covered with plates of pure gold, and set with
precious stones of immense value. Every prince of the house of Bhamenee,
who possessed this throne, made a point of adding to it some rich stones;
so that when in the reign of Sultan Mamood it was taken to pieces to
remove some of the jewels to be set in vases and cups, the jewellers
valued it at one corore of oons (nearly four millions sterling). I learned
also that it was called Firozeh from being partly enamelled of a sky-blue
color which was in time totally concealed by the number of jewels."--
_Ferishta_.








THE LOVES OF THE ANGELS.




PREFACE.


The Eastern story of the angels Harut and Marut and the Rabbinical
fictions of the loves of Uzziel and Shmchazai are the only sources to
which I need refer for the origin of the notion on which this Romance is
founded. In addition to the fitness of the subject for poetry, it struck
me also as capable of affording an allegorical medium through which might
be shadowed out (as I have endeavored to do in the following stories) the
fall of the Soul from its original purity[1]--the loss of light and
happiness which it suffers, in the pursuit of this world's perishable
pleasures--and the punishments both from conscience and Divine justice
with which impurity, pride, and presumptuous inquiry into the awful
secrets of Heaven are sure to be visited--The beautiful story of Cupid and
Psyche owes its chief charm to this sort of "veiled meaning," and it has
been my wish (however I may have failed in the attempt) to communicate to
the following pages the same _moral_ interest.

Among the doctrines or notions derived by Plato from the East, one of the
most natural and sublime is that which inculcates the pre-existence of the
soul and its gradual descent into this dark material world from that
region of spirit and light which it is supposed to have once inhabited and
to which after a long lapse of purification and trial it will return. This
belief under various symbolical forms may be traced through almost all the
Oriental theologies. The Chaldeans represent the Soul as originally
endowed with wings which fall away when it sinks from its native element
and must be re-produced before it can hope to return. Some disciples of
Zoroaster once inquired of him, "How the wings of the Soul might be made
to grow again?"

"By sprinkling them," he replied, "with the Waters of Life."

"But where are those Waters to be found?" they asked.

"In the Garden of God," replied Zoroaster.

The mythology of the Persians has allegorized the same doctrine, in the
history of those genii of light who strayed from their dwellings in the
stars and obscured their original nature by mixture with this material
sphere; while the Egyptians connecting it with the descent and ascent of
the sun in the zodiac considered Autumn as emblematic of the Soul's
decline toward darkness and the re-appearance of Spring as its return to
life and light.

Besides the chief spirits of the Mahometan heaven, such as Gabriel the
angel of Revelation, Israfil by whom the last trumpet is to be sounded,
and Azrael the angel of death, there were also a number of subaltern
intelligences of which tradition has preserved the names, appointed to
preside over the different stages of ascents into which the celestial
world was supposed to be divided.[2] Thus Kelail governs the fifth heaven;
while Sadiel, the presiding spirit of the third, is also employed in
steadying the motions of the earth which would be in a constant state of
agitation if this angel did not keep his foot planted upon its orb.

Among other miraculous interpositions in favor of Mahomet we find
commemorated in the pages of the Koran the appearance of five thousand
angels on his side at the battle of Bedr.

The ancient Persians supposed that Ormuzd appointed thirty angels to
preside successively over the days of the month and twelve greater ones to
assume the government of the months themselves; among whom Bahman (to whom
Ormuzd committed the custody of all animals, except man) was the greatest.
Mihr, the angel of the 7th month, was also the spirit that watched over
the affairs of friendship and love;--Chr had the care of the disk of the
sun;--Mah was agent for the concerns of the moon;--Isphandrmaz (whom
Cazvin calls the Spirit of the Earth) was the tutelar genius of good and
virtuous women, etc. For all this the reader may consult the 19th and 20th
chapters of Hyde, "_de Religione Veterum Persarum_," where the names and
attributes of these daily and monthly angels are with much minuteness and
erudition explained. It appears from the Zend-avesta that the Persians had
a certain office or prayer for every day of the month (addressed to the
particular angel who presided over it), which they called the Sirouz.

The Celestial Hierarchy of the Syrians, as described by Kircher, appears
to be the most regularly graduated of any of these systems. In the sphere
of the Moon they placed the angels, in that of Mercury the archangels,
Venus and the Sun contained the Principalities and the Powers;--and so on
to the summit of the planetary system, where, in the sphere of Saturn, the
Thrones had their station. Above this was the habitation of the Cherubim
in the sphere of the fixed stars; and still higher, in the region of those
stars which are so distant as to be imperceptible, the Seraphim, we are
told, the most perfect of all celestial creatures, dwelt.

The Sabeans also (as D'Herbelot tells us) had their classes of angels, to
whom they prayed as mediators, or intercessors; and the Arabians
worshipped _female_ angels, whom they called Benab Hasche, or, Daughters
of God.


[1] The account which Macrobius gives of the downward journey of the Soul,
through that gate of the zodiac which opens into the lower spheres, is a
curious specimen of the wild fancies that passed for philosophy in ancient
times.

[2] "We adorned the lower heaven with lights, and placed therein a guard
of angels."--_Koran, chap. xli_.






THE LOVES OF THE ANGELS


'Twas when the world was in its prime,
  When the fresh stars had just begun
Their race of glory and young Time
  Told his first birth-days by the sun;
When in the light of Nature's dawn
  Rejoicing, men and angels met
On the high hill and sunny lawn,--
Ere sorrow came or Sin had drawn
  'Twixt man and heaven her curtain yet!
When earth lay nearer to the skies
  Than in these days of crime and woe,
And mortals saw without surprise
In the mid-air angelic eyes
  Gazing upon this world below.

Alas! that Passion should profane
  Even then the morning of the earth!
That, sadder still, the fatal stain
  Should fall on hearts of heavenly birth--
And that from Woman's love should fall
So dark a stain, most sad of all!

One evening, in that primal hour,
  On a hill's side where hung the ray
Of sunset brightening rill and bower,
  Three noble youths conversing lay;
And, as they lookt from time to time
  To the far sky where Daylight furled
His radiant wing, their brows sublime
  Bespoke them of that distant world--
Spirits who once in brotherhood
Of faith and bliss near ALLA stood,
And o'er whose cheeks full oft had blown
The wind that breathes from ALLA'S throne,[1]
Creatures of light such as _still_ play,
  Like motes in sunshine, round the Lord,
And thro' their infinite array
Transmit each moment, night and day,
  The echo of His luminous word!

Of Heaven they spoke and, still more oft,
  Of the bright eyes that charmed them thence;
Till yielding gradual to the soft
  And balmy evening's influence--
The silent breathing of the flowers--
  The melting light that beamed above,
As on their first, fond, erring hours,--
  Each told the story of his love,
The history of that hour unblest,
When like a bird from its high nest
Won down by fascinating eyes,
For Woman's smile he lost the skies.

The First who spoke was one, with look
The least celestial of the three--
A Spirit of light mould that took
  The prints of earth most yieldingly;
Who even in heaven was not of those
  Nearest the Throne but held a place
Far off among those shining rows
  That circle out thro' endless space,
And o'er whose wings the light from Him
In Heaven's centre falls most dim.[2]

Still fair and glorious, he but shone
Among those youths the unheavenliest one--
A creature to whom light remained
From Eden still, but altered, stained,
And o'er whose brow not Love alone
  A blight had in his transit cast,
But other, earthlier joys had gone,
  And left their foot-prints as they past.
Sighing, as back thro' ages flown,
  Like a tomb-searcher, Memory ran,
Lifting each shroud that Time had thrown
  O'er buried hopes, he thus began:--


FIRST ANGEL'S STORY.


'Twas in a land that far away
  Into the golden orient lies,
Where Nature knows not night's delay,
But springs to meet her bridegroom, Day,
  Upon the threshold of the skies,
One morn, on earthly mission sent,[3]
  And mid-way choosing where to light,
I saw from the blue element--
  Oh beautiful, but fatal sight!--
One of earth's fairest womankind,
Half veiled from view, or rather shrined
In the clear crystal of a brook;
  Which while it hid no single gleam
Of her young beauties made them look
  More spirit-like, as they might seem
  Thro' the dim shadowing of a dream.
Pausing in wonder I lookt on,
  While playfully around her breaking
The waters that like diamonds shone
  She moved in light of her own making.
  At length as from that airy height
  I gently lowered my breathless flight,
The tremble of my wings all o'er
  (For thro' each plume I felt the thrill)
Startled her as she reached the shore
  Of that small lake--her mirror still--
Above whose brink she stood, like snow
When rosy with a sunset glow,
Never shall I forget those eyes!--
The shame, the innocent surprise
Of that bright face when in the air
Uplooking she beheld me there.
It seemed as if each thought and look
  And motion were that minute chained
Fast to the spot, such root she took,
And--like a sunflower by a brook,
  With face upturned--so still remained!

In pity to the wondering maid,
  Tho' loath from such a vision turning,
Downward I bent, beneath the shade
  Of my spread wings to hide the burning
Of glances, which--I well could feel--
  For me, for her, too warmly shone;
But ere I could again unseal
My restless eyes or even steal
  One sidelong look the maid was gone--
Hid from me in the forest leaves,
  Sudden as when in all her charms
Of full-blown light some cloud receives
  The Moon into his dusky arms.

'Tis not in words to tell the power,
The despotism that from that hour
Passion held o'er me. Day and night
  I sought around each neighboring spot;
And in the chase of this sweet light,
  My task and heaven and all forgot;--
All but the one, sole, haunting dream
Of her I saw in that bright stream.

Nor was it long ere by her side
  I found myself whole happy days
Listening to words whose music vied
  With our own Eden's seraph lays,
When seraph lays are warmed by love,
But wanting _that_ far, far above!--
And looking into eyes where, blue
And beautiful, like skies seen thro'
The sleeping wave, for me there shone
A heaven, more worshipt than my own.
Oh what, while I could hear and see
Such words and looks, was heaven to me?

Tho' gross the air on earth I drew,
'Twas blessed, while she breathed it too;
Tho' dark the flowers, tho' dim the sky,
Love lent them light while she was nigh.
Throughout creation I but knew
Two separate worlds--the _one_, that small,
  Beloved and consecrated spot
Where LEA was--the other, all
  The dull, wide waste where she was _not_!

But vain my suit, my madness vain;
Tho' gladly, from her eyes to gain
  One earthly look, one stray desire,
I would have torn the wings that hung
  Furled at my back and o'er the Fire
In GEHIM'S[4] pit their fragments flung;--
'Twas hopeless all--pure and unmoved
  She stood as lilies in the light
  Of the hot noon but look more white;--
And tho' she loved me, deeply loved,
'Twas not as man, as mortal--no,
Nothing of earth was in that glow--
She loved me but as one, of race
Angelic, from that radiant place
She saw so oft in dreams--that Heaven
  To which her prayers at morn were sent
And on whose light she gazed at even,
Wishing for wings that she might go
Out of this shadowy world below
  To that free, glorious element!

Well I remember by her side
Sitting at rosy even-tide,
When,--turning to the star whose head
Lookt out as from a bridal bed,
At that mute, blushing hour,--she said,
"Oh! that it were my doom to be
  "The Spirit of yon beauteous star,
"Dwelling up there in purity,
  "Alone as all such bright things are;--
"My sole employ to pray and shine,
  "To light my censer at the sun,
"And cast its fire towards the shrine
  "Of Him in heaven, the Eternal One!"

So innocent the maid, so free
  From mortal taint in soul and frame,
Whom 'twas my crime--my destiny--
  To love, ay, burn for, with a flame
  To which earth's wildest fires are tame.
Had you but seen her look when first
From my mad lips the avowal burst;
Not angered--no!--the feeling came
From depths beyond mere anger's flame--
It was a _sorrow_ calm as deep,
A mournfulness that could not weep,
So filled her heart was to the brink,
So fixt and frozen with grief to think
That angel natures--that even I
Whose love she clung to, as the tie
Between her spirit and the sky--
Should fall thus headlong from the height
Of all that heaven hath pure and bright!

That very night--my heart had grown
  Impatient of its inward burning;
The term, too, of my stay was flown,
And the bright Watchers near the throne.
Already, if a meteor shone
Between them and this nether zone,
  Thought 'twas their herald's wing returning.
Oft did the potent spell-word, given
  To Envoys hither from the skies,
To be pronounced when back to heaven
  It is their time or wish to rise,
Come to my lips that fatal day;
  And once too was so nearly spoken,
That my spread plumage in the ray
And breeze of heaven began to play;--
  When my heart failed--the spell was broken--
The word unfinisht died away,
And my checkt plumes ready to soar,
Fell slack and lifeless as before.
How could I leave a world which she,
Or lost or won, made all to me?
No matter where my wanderings were,
  So there she lookt, breathed, moved about--
Woe, ruin, death, more sweet with her,
  Than Paradise itself, without!

But to return--that very day
  A feast was held, where, full of mirth,
Came--crowding thick as flowers that play
In summer winds--the young and gay
  And beautiful of this bright earth.
And she was there and mid the young
  And beautiful stood first, alone;
Tho' on her gentle brow still hung
  The shadow I that morn had thrown--
The first that ever shame or woe
Had cast upon its vernal snow.
My heart was maddened;--in the flush
  Of the wild revel I gave way
To all that frantic mirth--that rush
  Of desperate gayety which they,
Who never felt how pain's excess
Can break out thus, think happiness!
Sad mimicry of mirth and life
Whose flashes come but from the strife
Of inward passions--like the light
Struck out by clashing swords in fight.

Then too that juice of earth, the bane
And blessing of man's heart and brain--
That draught of sorcery which brings
Phantoms of fair, forbidden things--
Whose drops like those of rainbows smile
  Upon the mists that circle man,
Brightening not only Earth the while,
  But grasping Heaven too in their span!--
Then first the fatal wine-cup rained
  Its dews of darkness thro' my lips,
Casting whate'er of light remained
  To my lost soul into eclipse;
And filling it with such wild dreams,
  Such fantasies and wrong desires,
As in the absence of heaven's beams
  Haunt us for ever--like wildfires
  That walk this earth when day retires.

Now hear the rest;--our banquet done,
  I sought her in the accustomed bower,
Where late we oft, when day was gone
And the world husht, had met alone,
  At the same silent, moonlight hour.
Her eyes as usual were upturned
To her loved star whose lustre burned
  Purer than ever on that night;
  While she in looking grew more bright
  As tho' she borrowed of its light.

There was a virtue in that scene,
  A spell of holiness around,
Which had my burning brain not been
  Thus maddened would have held me bound,
  As tho' I trod celestial ground.
Even as it was, with soul all flame
  And lips that burned in their own sighs,
I stood to gaze with awe and shame--
The memory of Eden came
  Full o'er me when I saw those eyes;
And tho' too well each glance of mine
  To the pale, shrinking maiden proved
How far, alas! from aught divine,
Aught worthy of so pure a shrine,
  Was the wild love with which I loved,
Yet must she, too, have seen--oh yes,
  'Tis soothing but to _think_ she saw
The deep, true, soul-felt tenderness,
  The homage of an Angel's awe
To her, a mortal, whom pure love
Then placed above him--far above--
And all that struggle to repress
A sinful spirit's mad excess,
Which workt within me at that hour,
  When with a voice where Passion shed
All the deep sadness of her power,
  Her melancholy power--I said,
"Then be it so; if back to heaven
  "I must unloved, unpitied fly.
"Without one blest memorial given
  "To soothe me in that lonely sky;
"One look like those the young and fond
  "Give when they're parting--which would be,
"Even in remembrance far beyond
  "All heaven hath left of bliss for me!

"Oh, but to see that head recline
  "A minute on this trembling arm,
"And those mild eyes look up to mine,
  "Without a dread, a thought of harm!
"To meet but once the thrilling touch
  "Of lips too purely fond to fear me--
"Or if that boon be all too much,
  "Even thus to bring their fragrance near me!
"Nay, shrink not so--a look--a word--
  "Give them but kindly and I fly;
"Already, see, my plumes have stirred
  "And tremble for their home on high.
"Thus be our parting--cheek to cheek--
  "One minute's lapse will be forgiven,
"And thou, the next, shalt hear me speak
  "The spell that plumes my wing for heaven!"

While thus I spoke, the fearful maid,
Of me and of herself afraid,
Had shrinking stood like flowers beneath
The scorching of the south-wind's breath:
But when I named--alas, too well,
  I now recall, tho' wildered then,--
Instantly, when I named the spell
  Her brow, her eyes uprose again;
And with an eagerness that spoke
The sudden light that o'er her broke,
"The spell, the spell!--oh, speak it now.
  "And I will bless thee!" she exclaimed--
  Unknowing what I did, inflamed,
And lost already, on her brow
  I stampt one burning kiss, and named
The mystic word till then ne'er told
To living creature of earth's mould!
Scarce was it said when quick a thought,
Her lips from mine like echo caught
The holy sound--her hands and eyes
Were instant lifted to the skies,
And thrice to heaven she spoke it out
  With that triumphant look Faith wears,
When not a cloud of fear or doubt,
  A vapor from this vale of tears.
  Between her and her God appears!
That very moment her whole frame
All bright and glorified became,
And at her back I saw unclose
Two wings magnificent as those
  That sparkle around ALLA'S Throne,
Whose plumes, as buoyantly she rose
  Above me, in the moon-beam shone
With a pure light; which--from its hue,
Unknown upon this earth--I knew
Was light from Eden, glistening thro'!
Most holy vision! ne'er before
  Did aught so radiant--since the day
When EBLIS in his downfall, bore
  The third of the bright stars away--
Rise in earth's beauty to repair
That loss of light and glory there!

But did I tamely view her flight?
  Did not I too proclaim out thrice
The powerful words that were that night,--
Oh even for heaven too much delight!--
  Again to bring us, eyes to eyes
  And soul to soul, in Paradise?
I did--I spoke it o'er and o'er--
  I prayed, I wept, but all in vain;
For me the spell had power no more.
  There seemed around me some dark chain
Which still as I essayed to soar
Baffled, alas, each wild endeavor;
Dead lay my wings as they have lain
Since that sad hour and will remain--
  So wills the offended God--for ever!

It was to yonder star I traced
Her journey up the illumined waste--
That isle in the blue firmament
To which so oft her fancy went
  In wishes and in dreams before,
And which was now--such, Purity,
Thy blest reward--ordained to be
  Her home of light for evermore!
Once--or did I but fancy so?--
  Even in her flight to that fair sphere,
Mid all her spirit's new-felt glow,
A pitying look she turned below
  On him who stood in darkness here;
Him whom perhaps if vain regret
Can dwell in heaven she pities yet;
And oft when looking to this dim
And distant world remembers him.

But soon that passing dream was gone;
Farther and farther off she shone,
Till lessened to a point as small
  As are those specks that yonder burn,--
Those vivid drops of light that fall
  The last from Day's exhausted urn.
And when at length she merged, afar,
Into her own immortal star,
And when at length my straining sight
  Had caught her wing's last fading ray,
That minute from my soul the light
Of heaven and love both past away;
And I forgot my home, my birth,
  Profaned my spirit, sunk my brow,
And revelled in gross joys of earth
Till I became--what I am now!

The Spirit bowed his head in shame;
  A shame that of itself would tell--
Were there not even those breaks of flame,
Celestial, thro' his clouded frame--
  How grand the height from which he fell!
That holy Shame which ne'er forgets
  The unblenched renown it used to wear;
Whose blush remains when Virtue sets
  To show her sunshine _has_ been there.

Once only while the tale he told
Were his eyes lifted to behold
That happy stainless, star where she
Dwelt in her bower of purity!
One minute did he look and then--
  As tho' he felt some deadly pain
  From its sweet light thro' heart and brain--
Shrunk back and never lookt again.

Who was the Second Spirit? he
  With the proud front and piercing glance--
  Who seemed when viewing heaven's expanse
As tho' his far-sent eye could see
On, on into the Immensity
Behind the veils of that blue sky
Where ALLA'S grandest secrets lie?--
His wings, the while, tho' day was gone,
  Flashing with many a various hue
Of light they from themselves alone,
  Instinct with Eden's brightness drew.
'Twas RUBI--once among the prime
  And flower of those bright creatures, named
Spirits of Knowledge,[5] who o'er Time
  And Space and Thought an empire claimed,
Second alone to Him whose light
Was even to theirs as day to night;
'Twixt whom and them was distance far
  And wide as would the journey be
To reach from any island star
  To vague shores of Infinity

'Twas RUBI in whose mournful eye
Slept the dim light of days gone by;
Whose voice tho' sweet fell on the ear
  Like echoes in some silent place
When first awaked for many a year;
  And when he smiled, if o'er his face
  Smile ever shone, 'twas like the grace
Of moonlight rainbows, fair, but wan,
The sunny life, the glory gone.
Even o'er his pride tho' still the same,
A softening shade from sorrow came;
And tho' at times his spirit knew
  The kindlings of disdain and ire,
Short was the fitful glare they threw--
Like the last flashes, fierce but few,
  Seen thro' some noble pile on fire!
Such was the Angel who now broke
  The silence that had come o'er all,
When he the Spirit that last spoke
  Closed the sad history of his fall;
And while a sacred lustre flown
  For many a day relumed his cheek--
Beautiful as in days of old;
And not those eloquent lips alone
  But every feature seemed to speak--
Thus his eventful story told:--


SECOND ANGEL'S STORY.


You both remember well the day
  When unto Eden's new-made bowers
ALLA convoked the bright array
  Of his supreme angelic powers
To witness the one wonder yet,
  Beyond man, angel, star, or sun,
He must achieve, ere he could set
  His seal upon the world as done--
To see the last perfection rise,
  That crowning of creation's birth,
When mid the worship and surprise
Of circling angels Woman's eyes
  First open upon heaven and earth;
And from their lids a thrill was sent,
That thro' each living spirit went
Like first light thro' the firmament!

Can you forget how gradual stole
The fresh-awakened breath of soul
Throughout her perfect form--which seemed
To grow transparent as there beamed
That dawn of Mind within and caught
New loveliness from each new thought?
Slow as o'er summer seas we trace
  The progress of the noontide air,
Dimpling its bright and silent face
Each minute into some new grace,
  And varying heaven's reflections there--
Or like the light of evening stealing
  O'er some fair temple which all day
Hath slept in shadow, slow revealing
  Its several beauties ray by ray,
Till it shines out, a thing to bless,
All full of light and loveliness.

Can you forget her blush when round
Thro' Eden's lone, enchanted ground
She lookt, and saw the sea--the skies--
  And heard the rush of many a wing,
  On high behests then vanishing;
And saw the last few angel eyes,
Still lingering--mine among the rest,--
Reluctant leaving scenes so blest?
From that miraculous hour the fate
  Of this new, glorious Being dwelt
For ever with a spell-like weight
Upon my spirit--early, late,
  Whate'er I did or dreamed or felt,
The thought of what might yet befall
That matchless creature mixt with all.--
Nor she alone but her whole race
  Thro' ages yet to come--whate'er
  Of feminine and fond and fair
Should spring from that pure mind and face,
  All waked my soul's intensest care;
Their forms, souls, feelings, still to me
Creation's strangest mystery!

It was my doom--even from the first,
When witnessing the primal burst
Of Nature's wonders, I saw rise
Those bright creations in the skies,--
Those worlds instinct with life and light,
Which Man, remote, but sees by night,--
It was my doom still to be haunted
  By some new wonder, some sublime
  And matchless work, that for the time
Held all my soul enchained, enchanted,
And left me not a thought, a dream,
A word but on that only theme!

The wish to know--that endless thirst,
  Which even by quenching is awaked,
And which becomes or blest or curst
  As is the fount whereat 'tis slaked--
Still urged me onward with desire
Insatiate, to explore, inquire--
Whate'er the wondrous things might be
That waked each new idolatry--
  Their cause, aim, source, whenever sprung--
Their inmost powers, as tho' for me
  Existence on that knowledge hung.

Oh what a vision were the stars
  When first I saw them born on high,
Rolling along like living cars
  Of light for gods to journey by![6]
They were like my heart's first passion--days
And nights unwearied, in their rays
Have I hung floating till each sense
Seemed full of their bright influence.
Innocent joy! alas, how much
  Of misery had I shunned below,
Could I have still lived blest with such;
  Nor, proud and restless, burned to know
  The knowledge that brings guilt and woe.

Often--so much I loved to trace
The secrets of this starry race--
Have I at morn and evening run
Along the lines of radiance spun
Like webs between them and the sun,
Untwisting all the tangled ties
Of light into their different dyes--
The fleetly winged I off in quest
Of those, the farthest, loneliest,
That watch like winking sentinels,[7]
The void, beyond which Chaos dwells;
And there with noiseless plume pursued
Their track thro' that grand solitude,
Asking intently all and each
What soul within their radiance dwelt,
And wishing their sweet light were speech,
  That they might tell me all they felt.

Nay, oft, so passionate my chase,
Of these resplendent heirs of space,
Oft did I follow--lest a ray
  Should 'scape me in the farthest night--
Some pilgrim Comet on his way
To visit distant shrines of light,
And well remember how I sung
  Exultingly when on my sight
New worlds of stars all fresh and young
As if just born of darkness sprung!

Such was my pure ambition then,
  My sinless transport night and morn
Ere yet this newer world of men,
  And that most fair of stars was born
Which I in fatal hour saw rise
Among the flowers of Paradise!

Thenceforth my nature all was changed,
  My heart, soul, senses turned below;
And he who but so lately ranged
  Yon wonderful expanse where glow
Worlds upon worlds,--yet found his mind
Even in that luminous range confined,--
Now blest the humblest, meanest sod
Of the dark earth where Woman trod!
In vain my former idols glistened
  From their far thrones; in vain these ears
To the once-thrilling music listened,
  That hymned around my favorite spheres--
To earth, to earth each thought was given,
  That in this half-lost soul had birth;
Like some high mount, whose head's in heaven
  While its whole shadow rests on earth!

Nor was it Love, even yet, that thralled
  My spirit in his burning ties;
And less, still less could it be called
  That grosser flame, round which Love flies
  Nearer and near till he dies--
No, it was wonder, such as thrilled
 At all God's works my dazzled sense;
The same rapt wonder, only filled
  With passion, more profound, intense,--
A vehement, but wandering fire,
Which, tho' nor love, nor yet desire,--
Tho' thro' all womankind it took
  Its range, its lawless lightnings run,
Yet wanted but a touch, a look,
  To fix it burning upon _One_.

Then too the ever-restless zeal,
  The insatiate curiosity,
To know how shapes so fair must feel--
To look but once beneath the seal
  Of so much loveliness and see
What souls belonged to such bright eyes--
  Whether as sunbeams find their way
Into the gem that hidden lies,
  Those looks could inward turn their ray,
  And make the soul as bright as they:
All this impelled my anxious chase.
  And still the more I saw and knew
Of Woman's fond, weak, conquering race,
  The intenser still my wonder grew.
I had beheld their First, their EVE,
  Born in that splendid Paradise,
Which sprung there solely to receive
  The first light of her waking eyes.
I had seen purest angels lean
  In worship o'er her from above;
And man--oh yes, had envying seen
  Proud man possest of all her love.

I saw their happiness, so brief,
  So exquisite,--her error, too,
That easy trust, that prompt belief
  In what the warm heart wishes true;
That faith in words, when kindly said.
By which the whole fond sex is led
Mingled with--what I durst not blame,
  For 'tis my own--that zeal to _know_,
Sad, fatal zeal, so sure of woe;
Which, tho' from heaven all pure it came,
Yet stained, misused, brought sin and shame
  On her, on me, on all below!

I had seen this; had seen Man, armed
  As his soul is with strength and sense,
By her first words to ruin charmed;
  His vaunted reason's cold defence,
Like an ice-barrier in the ray
Of melting summer, smiled away.
Nay, stranger yet, spite of all this--
  Tho' by her counsels taught to err,
  Tho' driven from Paradise for her,
(And _with_ her--_that_ at least was bliss,)
Had I not heard him ere he crost
  The threshold of that earthly heaven,
Which by her bewildering smile he lost--
  So quickly was the wrong forgiven--
Had I not heard him, as he prest
The frail, fond trembler to a breast
Which she had doomed to sin and strife,
Call her--even then--his Life! his Life![8]
Yes, such a love-taught name, the first,
  That ruined Man to Woman gave,
Even in his outcast hour, when curst
By her fond witchery, with that worst
  And earliest boon of love, the grave!
She who brought death into the world
  There stood before him, with the light
  Of their lost Paradise still bright
Upon those sunny locks that curled
Down her white shoulders to her feet--
So beautiful in form, so sweet
In heart and voice, as to redeem
  The loss, the death of all things dear,
Except herself--and make it seem
  Life, endless Life, while she was near!
Could I help wondering at a creature,
  Thus circled round with spells so strong--
One to whose every thought, word, feature.
  In joy and woe, thro' right and wrong,
Such sweet omnipotence heaven gave,
To bless or ruin, curse or save?

Nor did the marvel cease with her--
  New Eves in all her daughters came,
As strong to charm, as weak to err,
  As sure of man thro' praise and blame,
  Whate'er they brought him, pride or shame,
He still the unreasoning worshipper,
  And they, throughout all time, the same
  Enchantresses of soul and frame,
Into whose hands, from first to last,
  This world with all its destinies,
Devotedly by heaven seems cast,
  To save or ruin as they please!
Oh! 'tis not to be told how long,
  How restlessly I sighed to find
Some _one_ from out that witching throng,
  Some abstract of the form and mind
Of the whole matchless sex, from which,
  In my own arms beheld, possest,
I might learn all the powers to witch,
  To warm, and (if my fate unblest
  _Would_ have it) ruin, of the rest!
Into whose inward soul and sense,
  I might descend, as doth the bee
Into the flower's deep heart, and thence
  Rifle in all its purity
The prime, the quintessence, the whole
Of wondrous Woman's frame and soul!
At length my burning wish, my prayer--
(For such--oh! what will tongues not dare,
When hearts go wrong?--this lip preferred)--
At length my ominous prayer was heard--
But whether heard in heaven or hell,
Listen--and thou wilt know _too_ well.

There was a maid, of all who move
  Like visions o'er this orb most fit.
To be a bright young angel's love--
  Herself so bright, so exquisite!
The pride too of her step, as light
  Along the unconscious earth she went,
Seemed that of one born with a right
  To walk some heavenlier element,
And tread in places where her feet
A star at every step should meet.
'Twas not alone that loveliness
  By which the wildered sense is caught--
Of lips whose very breath could bless;
  Of playful blushes that seemed naught
  But luminous escapes of thought;
Of eyes that, when by anger stirred,
Were fire itself, but at a word
  Of tenderness, all soft became
As tho' they could, like the sun's bird,
  Dissolve away in their own flame--
Of form, as pliant as the shoots
  Of a young tree, in vernal flower;
Yet round and glowing as the fruits,
  That drop from it in summer's hour;--
'Twas not alone this loveliness
  That falls to loveliest women's share,
  Tho' even here her form could spare
From its own beauty's rich excess
  Enough to make even _them_ more fair--
But 'twas the Mind outshining clear
Thro' her whole frame--the soul, still near,
To light each charm, yet independent
  Of what it lighted, as the sun
That shines on flowers would be resplendent
  Were there no flowers to shine upon--
'Twas this, all this, in one combined--
  The unnumbered looks and arts that form
The glory of young womankind,
  Taken, in their perfection, warm,
  Ere time had chilled a single charm,
And stampt with such a seal of Mind,
  As gave to beauties that might be
Too sensual else, too unrefined,
  The impress of Divinity!

'Twas this--a union, which the hand
  Of Nature kept for her alone,
Of every thing most playful, bland,
Voluptuous, spiritual, grand,
  In angel-natures and her own--
Oh! this it was that drew me nigh
One, who seemed kin to heaven as I,
A bright twin-sister from on high--
One in whose love, I felt, were given
  The mixt delights of either sphere,
All that the spirit seeks in heaven,
  And all the senses burn for here.

Had we--but hold!--hear every part
  Of our sad tale--spite of the pain
Remembrance gives, when the fixt dart
  Is stirred thus in the wound again--
Hear every step, so full of bliss,
  And yet so ruinous, that led
Down to the last, dark precipice,
  Where perisht both--the fallen, the dead!

From the first hour she caught my sight,
I never left her--day and night
Hovering unseen around her way,
  And mid her loneliest musings near,
I soon could track each thought that lay,
  Gleaming within her heart, as clear
  As pebbles within brooks appear;
And there among the countless things
  That keep young hearts for ever glowing--
Vague wishes, fond imaginings,
  Love-dreams, as yet no object knowing--
Light, winged hopes that come when bid,
  And rainbow joys that end in weeping;
And passions among pure thoughts hid,
  Like serpents under flowerets sleeping:--
'Mong all these feelings--felt where'er
Young hearts are beating--I saw there
Proud thoughts, aspirings high--beyond
Whate'er yet dwelt in soul so fond--
Glimpses of glory, far away
  Into the bright, vague future given;
And fancies, free and grand, whose play,
  Like that of eaglets, is near heaven!
With this, too--what a soul and heart
To fall beneath the tempter's art!--
A zeal for knowledge, such as ne'er
Enshrined itself in form so fair,
Since that first, fatal hour, when Eve,
  With every fruit of Eden blest
Save one alone--rather than leave
  That _one_ unreached, lost all the rest.

It was in dreams that first I stole
  With gentle mastery o'er her mind--
In that rich twilight of the soul,
  When reason's beam, half hid behind
The clouds of sleep, obscurely gilds
Each shadowy shape that Fancy builds--
'Twas then by that soft light I brought
  Vague, glimmering visions to her view,--
Catches of radiance lost when caught,
Bright labyrinths that led to naught,
  And vistas with no pathway thro';--
Dwellings of bliss that opening shone,
  Then closed, dissolved, and left no trace--
All that, in short, could tempt Hope on,
  But give her wing no resting-place;
Myself the while with brow as yet
Pure as the young moon's coronet,
Thro' every dream _still_ in her sight.
  The enchanter of each mocking scene,
Who gave the hope, then brought the blight,
Who said, "Behold yon world of light,"
  Then sudden dropt a veil between!

At length when I perceived each thought,
Waking or sleeping, fixt on naught
  But these illusive scenes and me--
The phantom who thus came and went,
In half revealments, only meant
  To madden curiosity--
When by such various arts I found
Her fancy to its utmost wound.
One night--'twas in a holy spot
Which she for prayer had chosen--a grot
Of purest marble built below
Her garden beds, thro' which a glow
From lamps invisible then stole,
  Brightly pervading all the place--
Like that mysterious light the soul,
  Itself unseen, sheds thro' the face.
There at her altar while she knelt,
And all that woman ever felt,
  When God and man both claimed her sighs--
Every warm thought, that ever dwelt,
  Like summer clouds, 'twixt earth and skies,
  Too pure to fall, too gross to rise,
  Spoke in her gestures, tones, and eyes--
Then, as the mystic light's soft ray
Grew softer still, as tho' its ray
Was breathed from her, I heard her say:--

"O idol of my dreams! whate'er
  "Thy nature be--human, divine,
"Or but half heavenly--still too fair,
  "Too heavenly to be ever mine!

"Wonderful Spirit who dost make
  "Slumber so lovely that it seems
"No longer life to live awake,
  "Since heaven itself descends in dreams,

"Why do I ever lose thee? why
  "When on thy realms and thee I gaze
"Still drops that veil, which I could die,
  "Oh! gladly, but one hour to raise?

"Long ere such miracles as thou
  "And thine came o'er my thoughts, a thirst
"For light was in this soul which now
  "Thy looks have into passion burst.

"There's nothing bright above, below,
  "In sky--earth--ocean, that this breast
"Doth not intensely burn to know,
  "And thee, thee, thee, o'er all the rest!

"Then come, oh Spirit, from behind
  "The curtains of thy radiant home,
"If thou wouldst be as angel shrined,
  "Or loved and claspt as mortal, come!

"Bring all thy dazzling wonders here,
  "That I may, waking, know and see;
"Or waft me hence to thy own sphere,
  "Thy heaven or--ay, even _that_ with thee!

"Demon or God, who hold'st the book
  "Of knowledge spread beneath thine eye,
"Give me, with thee, but one bright look
  "Into its leaves and let me die!

"By those ethereal wings whose way
  "Lies thro' an element so fraught
"With living Mind that as they play
  "Their every movement is a thought!

"By that bright, wreathed hair, between
  "Whose sunny clusters the sweet wind
"Of Paradise so late hath been
  "And left its fragrant soul behind!

"By those impassioned eyes that melt
  "Their light into the inmost heart,
"Like sunset in the waters, felt
  "As molten fire thro' every part--

"I do implore thee, oh most bright
  "And worshipt Spirit, shine but o'er
"My waking, wondering eyes this night
  "This one blest night--I ask no more!"

Exhausted, breathless, as she said
These burning words, her languid head
Upon the altar's steps she cast,
As if that brain-throb were its last---

Till, startled by the breathing, nigh,
Of lips that echoed back her sigh,
Sudden her brow again she raised;
  And there, just lighted on the shrine,
Beheld me--not as I had blazed
  Around her, full of light divine,
In her late dreams, but softened down
Into more mortal grace;--my crown
Of flowers, too radiant for this world,
  Left hanging on yon starry steep;
My wings shut up, like banners furled,
  When Peace hath put their pomp to sleep;
  Or like autumnal clouds that keep
Their lightnings sheathed rather than mar
The dawning hour of some young star;
And nothing left but what beseemed
  The accessible, tho' glorious mate
Of mortal woman--whose eyes beamed
  Back upon hers, as passionate;
Whose ready heart brought flame for flame,
Whose sin, whose madness was the same;
And whose soul lost in that one hour
  For her and for her love--oh more
Of heaven's light than even the power
  Of heaven itself could now restore!
And yet, that hour!--

                    The Spirit here
  Stopt in his utterance as if words
Gave way beneath the wild career
  Of his then rushing thoughts--like chords,
Midway in some enthusiast's song,
Breaking beneath a touch too strong;
While the clenched hand upon the brow
Told how remembrance throbbed there now!
But soon 'twas o'er--that casual blaze
From the sunk fire of other days--
That relic of a flame whose burning
  Had been too fierce to be relumed,
Soon passt away, and the youth turning
  To his bright listeners thus resumed:--

Days, months elapsed, and, tho' what most
  On earth I sighed for was mine, all--
Yet--was I happy? God, thou know'st,
Howe'er they smile and feign and boast,
  What happiness is theirs, who fall!
'Twas bitterest anguish--made more keen
Even by the love, the bliss, between
Whose throbs it came, like gleams of hell
  In agonizing cross-light given
Athwart the glimpses, they who dwell
  In purgatory[9] catch of heaven!
The only feeling that to me
  Seemed joy--or rather my sole rest
From aching misery--was to see
  My young, proud, blooming LILIS blest.
She, the fair fountain of all ill
  To my lost soul--whom yet its thirst
Fervidly panted after still,
  And found the charm fresh as at first--
To see _her_ happy--to reflect
  Whatever beams still round me played
Of former pride, of glory wreckt,
  On her, my Moon, whose light I made,
  And whose soul worshipt even my shade--
This was, I own, enjoyment--this
My sole, last lingering glimpse of bliss.
And proud she was, fair creature!--proud,
  Beyond what even most queenly stirs
In woman's heart, nor would have bowed
  That beautiful young brow of hers
To aught beneath the First above,
So high she deemed her Cherub's love!

Then too that passion hourly growing
  Stronger and stronger--to which even
Her love at times gave way--of knowing
  Everything strange in earth and heaven;
Not only all that, full revealed,
  The eternal ALLA loves to show,
But all that He hath wisely sealed
  In darkness for man _not_ to know--
Even this desire, alas! ill-starred
  And fatal as it was, I sought
To feed each minute, and unbarred
  Such realms of wonder on her thought
As ne'er till then had let their light
Escape on any mortal's sight!

In the deep earth--beneath the sea--
  Thro' caves of fire--thro' wilds of air--
Wherever sleeping Mystery
  Had spread her curtain, we were there--
Love still beside us as we went,
At home in each new element
  And sure of worship everywhere!

Then first was Nature taught to lay
  The wealth of all her kingdoms down
At woman's worshipt feet and say
  "Bright creature, this is all thine own!"
Then first were diamonds from the night,
Of earth's deep centre brought to light
And made to grace the conquering way
Of proud young beauty with their ray.

Then too the pearl from out its shell
  Unsightly, in the sunless sea,
(As 'twere a spirit, forced to dwell
  In form unlovely) was set free,
And round the neck of woman threw
A light it lent and borrowed too.
For never did this maid--whate'er
  The ambition of the hour--forget
Her sex's pride in being fair;
Nor that adornment, tasteful, rare,
Which makes the mighty magnet, set
In Woman's form, more mighty yet.
Nor was there aught within the range
  Of my swift wing in sea or air,
Of beautiful or grand or strange,
That, quickly as her wish could change,
  I did not seek, with such fond care,
That when I've seen her look above
  At some bright star admiringly,
I've said, "Nay, look not there, my love,[10]
  "Alas, I _can not_ give it thee!"

But not alone the wonders found
  Thro' Nature's realm--the unveiled, material,
Visible glories, that abound
Thro' all her vast, enchanted ground--
  But whatsoe'er unseen, ethereal,
Dwells far away from human sense,
Wrapt in its own intelligence--
The mystery of that Fountainhead,
  From which all vital spirit runs,
All breath of Life, where'er 'tis spread
  Thro' men or angels, flowers or suns--
The workings of the Almighty Mind,
When first o'er Chaos he designed
The outlines of this world, and thro'
  That depth of darkness--like the bow,
Called out of rain-clouds hue by hue[11]
  Saw the grand, gradual picture grow;--
The covenant with human kind
  By ALLA made--the chains of Fate
He round himself and them hath twined,
  Till his high task he consummate;--
  Till good from evil, love from hate,
Shall be workt out thro' sin and pain,
And Fate shall loose her iron chain
And all be free, be bright again!


Such were the deep-drawn mysteries,
  And some, even more obscure, profound,
And wildering to the mind than these,
  Which--far as woman's thought could sound,
Or a fallen, outlawed spirit reach--
She dared to learn and I to teach.
Till--filled with such unearthly lore,
  And mingling the pure light it brings
With much that fancy had before
  Shed in false, tinted glimmerings--
The enthusiast girl spoke out, as one
  Inspired, among her own dark race,
Who from their ancient shrines would run,
Leaving their holy rites undone,
  To gaze upon her holier face.
And tho' but wild the things she spoke,
Yet mid that play of error's smoke
  Into fair shapes by fancy curled,
Some gleams of pure religion broke--
Glimpses that have not yet awoke,
  But startled the still dreaming world!
Oh! many a truth, remote, sublime,
  Which Heaven would from the minds of men
Have kept concealed till its own time,
  Stole out in these revealments then--
Revealments dim that have forerun,
By ages, the great, Sealing One![12]
Like that imperfect dawn or light[13]
  Escaping from the Zodiac's signs,
Which makes the doubtful east half bright,
  Before the real morning shines!

Thus did some moons of bliss go by--
  Of bliss to her who saw but love
And knowledge throughout earth and sky;
To whose enamored soul and eye
I seemed--as is the sun on high--
  The light of all below, above,
The spirit of sea and land and air,
Whose influence, felt everywhere,
Spread from its centre, her own heart,
Even to the world's extremest part;
While thro' that world her rainless mind
  Had now careered so fast and far,
That earth itself seemed left behind
And her proud fancy unconfined
  Already saw Heaven's gates ajar!

Happy enthusiast! still, oh! still
Spite of my own heart's mortal chill,
Spite of that double-fronted sorrow
  Which looks at once before and back,
Beholds the yesterday, the morrow,
  And sees both comfortless, both black--
Spite of all this, I could have still
In her delight forgot all ill;
Or if pain _would_ not be forgot,
At least have borne and murmured not.
When thoughts of an offended heaven,
  Of sinfulness, which I--even I,
While down its steep most headlong driven--
Well knew could never be forgiven,
  Came o'er me with an agony
Beyond all reach of mortal woe--
A torture kept for those who know.

Know _every_ thing, and--worst of all--
Know and love Virtue while they fall!
Even then her presence had the power
  To soothe, to warm--nay, even to bless--
If ever bliss could graft its flower
  On stem so full of bitterness--
Even then her glorious smile to me
  Brought warmth and radiance if not balm;
Like moonlight o'er a troubled sea.
  Brightening the storm it cannot calm.

Oft too when that disheartening fear,
  Which all who love, beneath yon sky,
Feel when they gaze on what is dear--
  The dreadful thought that it must die!
That desolating thought which comes
Into men's happiest hours and homes;
Whose melancholy boding flings
Death's shadow o'er the brightest things,
Sicklies the infant's bloom and spreads
The grave beneath young lovers' heads!
This fear, so sad to all--to me
  Most full of sadness from the thought
That I most still live on,[14] when she
Would, like the snow that on the sea
  Fell yesterday, in vain be sought;
That heaven to me this final seal
  Of all earth's sorrow would deny,
And I eternally must feel
  The death-pang without power to die!

Even this, her fond endearments--fond
As ever cherisht the sweet bond
'Twixt heart and heart--could charm away;
Before her looks no clouds would stay,
Or if they did their gloom was gone,
Their darkness put a glory on!
But 'tis not, 'tis not for the wrong,
The guilty, to be happy long;
And she too now had sunk within
The shadow of her tempter's sin,
Too deep for even Omnipotence
To snatch the fated victim thence!
Listen and if a tear there be
Left in your hearts weep it for me.

'Twas on the evening of a day,
Which we in love had dreamt away;
In that same garden, where--the pride
Of seraph splendor laid aside,
And those wings furled, whose open light
For mortal gaze were else too bright--
I first had stood before her sight,
And found myself--oh, ecstasy,
  Which even in pain I ne'er forget--
Worshipt as only God should be,
  And loved as never man was yet!
In that same garden where we now,
  Thoughtfully side by side reclining,
Her eyes turned upward and her brow
  With its own silent fancies shining.

It was an evening bright and still
  As ever blusht on wave or bower,
Smiling from heaven as if naught ill
  Could happen in so sweet an hour.
Yet I remember both grew sad
  In looking at that light--even she,
Of heart so fresh and brow so glad,
  Felt the still hour's solemnity,
And thought she saw in that repose
  The death-hour not alone of light,
But of this whole fair world--the close
  Of all things beautiful and bright--
The last, grand sunset, in whose ray
Nature herself died calm away!

At length, as tho' some livelier thought
Had suddenly her fancy caught,
She turned upon me her dark eyes,
  Dilated into that full shape
They took in joy, reproach, surprise,
  As 'twere to let more soul escape,
And, playfully as on my head
Her white hand rested, smiled and said:--

"I had last night a dream of thee,
  "Resembling those divine ones, given,
"Like preludes to sweet minstrelsy,
  "Before thou camest thyself from heaven.

"The same rich wreath was on thy brow,
  "Dazzling as if of starlight made;
"And these wings, lying darkly now,
  "Like meteors round thee flasht and played.

"Thou stoodest, all bright, as in those dreams,
  "As if just wafted from above,
"Mingling earth's warmth with heaven's beams,
  "And creature to adore and love.

"Sudden I felt thee draw me near
  "To thy pure heart, where, fondly placed,
"I seemed within the atmosphere
  "Of that exhaling light embraced;

"And felt methought the ethereal flame
  "Pass from thy purer soul to mine;
"Till--oh, too blissful--I became,
  "Like thee, all spirit, all divine!

"Say, why did dream so blest come o'er me,
  "If, now I wake, 'tis faded, gone?
"When will my Cherub shine before me
  "Thus radiant, as in heaven he shone?

"When shall I, waking, be allowed
  "To gaze upon those perfect charms,
"And clasp thee once without a cloud,
  "A chill of earth, within these arms?

"Oh what a pride to say, this, this
  "Is my own Angel--all divine,
"And pure and dazzling as he is
  "And fresh from heaven--he's mine, he's mine!

"Thinkest thou, were LILIS in thy place,
  "A creature of yon lofty skies,
"She would have hid one single grace,
  "One glory from her lover's eyes?

  "No, no--then, if thou lovest like me,
  "Shine out, young Spirit in the blaze
"Of thy most proud divinity,
  "Nor think thou'lt wound this mortal gaze.

"Too long and oft I've looked upon
  "Those ardent eyes, intense even thus--
"Too near the stars themselves have gone,
  "To fear aught grand or luminous.

"Then doubt me not--oh! who can say
  "But that this dream may yet come true
"And my blest spirit drink thy ray,
  "Till it becomes all heavenly too?

"Let me this once but feel the flame
  "Of those spread wings, the very pride
"Will change my nature, and this frame
  "By the mere touch be deified!"

Thus spoke the maid, as one not used
To be by earth or heaven refused--
As one who knew her influence o'er
  All creatures, whatsoe'er they were,
And tho' to heaven she could not soar,
  At least would bring down heaven to her.

Little did she, alas! or I--
  Even I, whose soul, but halfway yet
Immerged in sin's obscurity
Was as the earth whereon we lie,
  O'er half whose disk the sun is set--
Little did we foresee the fate,
  The dreadful--how can it be told?
Such pain, such anguish to relate
  Is o'er again to feel, behold!
But, charged as 'tis, my heart must speak
Its sorrow out or it will break!
Some dark misgivings _had_, I own,
  Past for a moment thro' my breast--
Fears of some danger, vague, unknown,
  To one, or both--something unblest
  To happen from this proud request.

But soon these boding fancies fled;
  Nor saw I aught that could forbid
My full revealment save the dread
  Of that first dazzle, when, unhid,
  Such light should burst upon a lid
Ne'er tried in heaven;--and even this glare
She might, by love's own nursing care,
Be, like young eagles, taught to bear.
For well I knew, the lustre shed
From cherub wings, when proudliest spread,
Was in its nature lambent, pure,
  And innocent as is the light
The glow-worm hangs out to allure
  Her mate to her green bower at night.
Oft had I in the mid-air swept
Thro' clouds in which the lightning slept,
As in its lair, ready to spring,
Yet waked it not--tho' from my wing
A thousand sparks fell glittering!
Oft too when round me from above
  The feathered snow in all its whiteness,
Fell like the moultings of heaven's Dove,[15]--
  So harmless, tho' so full of brightness,
Was my brow's wreath that it would shake
From off its flowers each downy flake
As delicate, unmelted, fair,
And cool as they had lighted there.

Nay even with LILIS--had I not
  Around her sleep all radiant beamed,
Hung o'er her slumbers nor forgot
  To kiss her eyelids as she dreamed?
And yet at morn from that repose,
  Had she not waked, unscathed and bright,
As doth the pure, unconscious rose
  Tho' by the fire-fly kist all night?

Thus having--as, alas! deceived
By my sin's blindness, I believed--
No cause for dread and those dark eyes
  Now fixt upon me eagerly
As tho' the unlocking of the skies
  Then waited but a sign from me--
How could I pause? how even let fall
  A word; a whisper that could stir
In her proud heart a doubt that all
  I brought from heaven belonged to her?
Slow from her side I rose, while she
Arose too, mutely, tremblingly,
But not with fear--all hope, and pride,
  She waited for the awful boon,
Like priestesses at eventide
  Watching the rise of the full moon
Whose light, when once its orb hath shone,
'Twill madden them to look upon!

Of all my glories, the bright crown
Which when I last from heaven came down
Was left behind me in yon star
That shines from out those clouds afar--
Where, relic sad, 'tis treasured yet,
The downfallen angel's coronet!--
Of all my glories, this alone
Was wanting:--but the illumined brow,
The sun-bright locks, the eyes that now
Had love's spell added to their own,
And poured a light till then unknown;--
  The unfolded wings that in their play
Shed sparkles bright as ALLA'S throne;
  All I could bring of heaven's array,
  Of that rich panoply of charms
A Cherub moves in, on the day
Of his best pomp, I now put on;
And, proud that in her eyes I shone
  Thus glorious, glided to her arms;
Which still (tho', at a sight so splendid,
  Her dazzled brow had instantly
Sunk on her breast), were wide extended
  To clasp the form she durst not see![16]
Great Heaven! how _could_ thy vengeance light
So bitterly on one so bright?
How could the hand that gave such charms,
Blast them again in love's own arms?
Scarce had I touched her shrinking frame,
  When--oh most horrible!--I felt
That every spark of that pure flame--
  Pure, while among the stars I dwelt--
Was now by my transgression turned
Into gross, earthly fire, which burned,
Burned all it touched as fast as eye
  Could follow the fierce, ravening flashes;
Till there--oh God, I still ask why
Such doom was hers?--I saw her lie
  Blackening within my arms to ashes!
That brow, a glory but to see--
  Those lips whose touch was what the first
Fresh cup of immortality
  Is to a new-made angel's thirst!

Those clasping arms, within whose round--
My heart's horizon--the whole bound
Of its hope, prospect, heaven was found!
Which, even in this dread moment, fond
  As when they first were round me cast,
Loosed not in death the fatal bond,
  But, burning, held me to the last!
All, all, that, but that morn, had seemed
As if Love's self there breathed and beamed,
Now parched and black before me lay,
Withering in agony away;
And mine, oh misery! mine the flame
From which this desolation came;--
I, the curst spirit whose caress
Had blasted all that loveliness!

'Twas maddening!--but now hear even worse--
Had death, death only, been the curse
I brought upon her--had the doom
But ended here, when her young bloom
Lay in the dust--and did the spirit
No part of that fell curse inherit,
'Twere not so dreadful--but, come near--
Too shocking 'tis for earth to hear--
Just when her eyes in fading took
Their last, keen, agonized farewell,
And looked in mine with--oh, that look!
  Great vengeful Power, whate'er the hell
Thou mayst to human souls assign,
The memory of that look is mine!--

In her last struggle, on my brow
  Her ashy lips a kiss imprest,
So withering!--I feel it now--
  'Twas fire--but fire, even more unblest
Than was my own, and like that flame,
The angels shudder but to name,
Hell's everlasting element!
  Deep, deep it pierced into my brain,
Maddening and torturing as it went;
  And here, mark here, the brand, the stain
It left upon my front--burnt in
By that last kiss of love and sin--
A brand which all the pomp and pride
Of a fallen Spirit cannot hide!

But is it thus, dread Providence--
  _Can_ it indeed be thus, that she
Who, (but for _one_ proud, fond offence,)
  Had honored heaven itself, should be
Now doomed--I cannot speak it--no,
Merciful ALLA! _'tis_ not so--
Never could lips divine have said
The fiat of a fate so dread.
And yet, that look--so deeply fraught
  With more than anguish, with despair--
That new, fierce fire, resembling naught
  In heaven or earth--this scorch I bear!--
Oh--for the first time that these knees
  Have bent before thee since my fall,
Great Power, if ever thy decrees
  Thou couldst for prayer like mine recall,
Pardon that spirit, and on me,
  On me, who taught her pride to err,
Shed out each drop of agony
  Thy burning phial keeps for her!
See too where low beside me kneel
  Two other outcasts who, tho' gone
And lost themselves, yet dare to feel
  And pray for that poor mortal one.
Alas, too well, too well they know
The pain, the penitence, the woe
That Passion brings upon the best,
The wisest, and the loveliest.--
Oh! who is to be saved, if such
  Bright, erring souls are not forgiven;
So loath they wander, and so much
  Their very wanderings lean towards heaven!
Again I cry. Just Power, transfer
  That creature's sufferings all to me--
  Mine, mine the guilt, the torment be,
To save one minute's pain to her,
  Let mine last all eternity!

He paused and to the earth bent down
  His throbbing head; while they who felt
That agony as 'twere their own,
  Those angel youths, beside him knelt,
And in the night's still silence there,
While mournfully each wandering air
Played in those plumes that never more
To their lost home in heaven must soar,
Breathed inwardly the voiceless prayer,
Unheard by all but Mercy's ear--
And which if Mercy _did not_ hear,
Oh, God would _not_ be what this bright
  And glorious universe of His,
This world of beauty, goodness, light
  And endless love proclaims He _is_!

Not long they knelt, when from a wood
That crowned that airy solitude,
They heard a low, uncertain sound,
As from a lute, that just had found
Some happy theme and murmured round
The new-born fancy, with fond tone,
Scarce thinking aught so sweet its own!
Till soon a voice, that matched as well
  That gentle instrument, as suits
The sea-air to an ocean-shell,
  (So kin its spirit to the lute's),
Tremblingly followed the soft strain,
Interpreting its joy, its pain,
  And lending the light wings of words
To many a thought that else had lain
  Unfledged and mute among the chords.

All started at the sound--but chief
  The third young Angel in whose face,
Tho' faded like the others, grief
  Had left a gentler, holier trace;
As if, even yet, thro' pain and ill,
Hope had not fled him--as if still
Her precious pearl in sorrow's cup
  Unmelted at the bottom lay,
To shine again, when, all drunk up,
  The bitterness should pass away.
Chiefly did he, tho' in his eyes
There shone more pleasure than surprise,
Turn to the wood from whence that sound
  Of solitary sweetness broke;
Then, listening, look delighted round
  To his bright peers, while thus it spoke:--
"Come, pray with me, my seraph love,
  "My angel-lord, come pray with me:
"In vain to-night my lips hath strove
"To send one holy prayer above--
"The knee may bend, the lip may move,
  "But pray I cannot, without thee!
"I've fed the altar in my bower
  "With droppings from the incense tree;
"I've sheltered it from wind and shower,
"But dim it burns the livelong hour,
"As if, like me, it had no power
  "Of life or lustre without thee!

"A boat at midnight sent alone
  "To drift upon the moonless sea,
"A lute, whose leading chord is gone,
"A wounded bird that hath but one
"Imperfect wing to soar upon,
  "Are like what I am without thee!

"Then ne'er, my spirit-love, divide,
  "In life or death, thyself from me;
"But when again in sunny pride
"Thou walk'st thro' Eden, let me glide,
"A prostrate shadow, by thy side--
  "Oh happier thus than without thee!"

The song had ceased when from the wood
  Which sweeping down that airy height,
Reached the lone spot whereon they stood--
  There suddenly shone out a light
From a clear lamp, which, as it blazed
Across the brow of one, who raised
Its flame aloft (as if to throw
The light upon that group below),
Displayed two eyes sparkling between
The dusky leaves, such as are seen
By fancy only, in those faces,
  That haunt a poet's walk at even,
Looking from out their leafy places
  Upon his dreams of love and heaven.
'Twas but a moment--the blush brought
O'er all her features at the thought
  Of being seen thus, late, alone,
By any but the eyes she sought,
  Had scarcely for an instant shore
  Thro' the dark leaves when she was gone--
Gone, like a meteor that o'erhead
Suddenly shines, and, ere we've said,
"Behold, how beautiful!"--'tis fled,
Yet ere she went the words, "I come,
  "I come, my NAMA," reached her ear,
  In that kind voice, familiar, dear,
Which tells of confidence, of home,--
  Of habit, that hath drawn hearts near,
Till they grow _one_,--of faith sincere,
And all that Love most loves to hear;
A music breathing of the past,
  The present and the time to be,
Where Hope and Memory to the last
  Lengthen out life's true harmony!

Nor long did he whom call so kind
Summoned away remain behind:
Nor did there need much time to tell
  What they--alas! more fallen than he
From happiness and heaven--knew well,
  His gentler love's short history!

Thus did it run--_not_ as he told
  The tale himself, but as 'tis graved
Upon the tablets that, of old,
  By SETH[17] were from the deluge saved,
All written over with sublime
  And saddening legends of the unblest
But glorious Spirits of that time,
  And this young Angel's 'mong the rest.


THIRD ANGEL'S STORY.


Among the Spirits, of pure flame,
  That in the eternal heavens abide--
Circles of light that from the same
  Unclouded centre sweeping wide,
  Carry its beams on every side--
Like spheres of air that waft around
The undulations of rich sound--

Till the far-circling radiance be
Diffused into infinity!
First and immediate near the Throne
Of ALLA, as if most his own,
The Seraphs stand[18] this burning sign
Traced on their banner, "Love Divine!"
Their rank, their honors, far above
  Even those to high-browed Cherubs given,
Tho' knowing all;--so much doth Love
  Transcend all Knowledge, even in heaven!

'Mong these was ZARAPH once--and none
  E'er felt affection's holy fire,
Or yearned towards the Eternal One,
  With half such longing, deep desire.
Love was to his impassioned soul
  Not as with others a mere part
Of its existence, but the whole--
  The very life-breath of his heart!

Oft, when from ALLA'S lifted brow
  A lustre came, too bright to bear,
And all the seraph ranks would bow,
  To shade their dazzled sight nor dare
  To look upon the effulgence there--
This Spirit's eyes would court the blaze
  (Such pride he in adoring took),

And rather lose in that one gaze
  The power of looking than _not_ look!
Then too when angel voices sung
The mercy of their God and strung
Their harps to hail with welcome sweet
  That moment, watched for by all eyes,
When some repentant sinner's feet
  First touched the threshold of the skies,
Oh! then how clearly did the voice
Of ZARAPH above all rejoice!
Love was in every buoyant tone--
  Such love as only could belong
To the blest angels and alone
  Could, even from angels, bring such song!
Alas! that it should e'er have been
  In heaven as 'tis too often here,
Where nothing fond or bright is seen,
  But it hath pain and peril near;--
Where right and wrong so close resemble,
  That what we take for virtue's thrill
Is often the first downward tremble
  Of the heart's balance unto ill;
Where Love hath not a shrine so pure,
  So holy, but the serpent, Sin,
In moments, even the most secure,
  Beneath his altar may glide in!

So was it with that Angel--such
  The charm, that sloped his fall along,
From good to ill, from loving much,
  Too easy lapse, to loving wrong.--
Even so that amorous Spirit, bound
By beauty's spell where'er 'twas found,
From the bright things above the moon
  Down to earth's beaming eyes descended,
Till love for the Creator soon
  In passion for the creature ended.

'Twas first at twilight, on the shore
  Of the smooth sea, he heard the lute
And voice of her he loved steal o'er
  The silver waters that lay mute,
As loath, by even a breath, to stay
The pilgrimage of that sweet lay;
Whose echoes still went on and on,
Till lost among the light that shone
Far off beyond the ocean's brim--
  There where the rich cascade of day
Had o'er the horizon's golden rim,
  Into Elysium rolled away!
Of God she sung and of the mild
  Attendant Mercy that beside
His awful throne for ever smiled,
  Ready with her white hand to guide
His bolts of vengeance to their prey--
That she might quench them on the way!
Of Peace--of that Atoning Love,
Upon whose star, shining above
This twilight world of hope and fear,
  The weeping eyes of Faith are fixt
So fond that with her every tear
  The light of that love-star is mixt!--
All this she sung, and such a soul
  Of piety was in that song
That the charmed Angel as it stole
  Tenderly to his ear, along
Those lulling waters where he lay,
Watching the daylight's dying ray,
Thought 'twas a voice from out the wave,
An echo, that some sea-nymph gave
To Eden's distant harmony,
Heard faint and sweet beneath the sea!

Quickly, however, to its source,
Tracking that music's melting course,
He saw upon the golden sands
Of the sea-shore a maiden stand,
Before whose feet the expiring waves
  Flung their last offering with a sigh--
As, in the East, exhausted slaves
  Lay down the far-brought gift and die--
And while her lute hung by her hushed
  As if unequal to the tide
Of song that from her lips still gushed,
  She raised, like one beatified,
Those eyes whose light seemed rather given
  To be adored than to adore--
Such eyes as may have lookt _from_ heaven
  But ne'er were raised to it before!

Oh Love, Religion, Music--all
  That's left of Eden upon earth--
The only blessings, since the fall
Of our weak souls, that still recall
  A trace of their high, glorious birth--
How kindred are the dreams you bring!
  How Love tho' unto earth so prone,
Delights to take Religion's wing,
  When time or grief hath stained his own!
How near to Love's beguiling brink
  Too oft entranced Religion lies!
While Music, Music is the link
  They _both_ still hold by to the skies,
The language of their native sphere
Which they had else forgotten here.

How then could ZARAPH fail to feel
  That moment's witcheries?--one, so fair,
Breathing out music, that might steal
  Heaven from itself, and rapt in prayer
  That seraphs might be proud to share!
Oh, he _did_ feel it, all too well--
  With warmth, that far too dearly cost--
Nor knew he, when at last he fell,
To which attraction, to which spell,
Love, Music, or Devotion, most
His soul in that sweet hour was lost.

Sweet was the hour, tho' dearly won,
  And pure, as aught of earth could be,
For then first did the glorious sun
  Before religion's altar see
Two hearts in wedlock's golden tie
Self-pledged, in love to live and die.
Blest union! by that Angel wove,
  And worthy from such hands to come;
Safe, sole, asylum, in which Love,
When fallen or exiled from above,
  In this dark world can find a home.

And, tho' the Spirit had transgrest,
Had, from his station 'mong the blest
Won down by woman's smile, allow'd
  Terrestrial passion to breathe o'er
The mirror of his heart, and cloud
  God's image there so bright before--
Yet never did that Power look down
  On error with a brow so mild;
Never did Justice wear a frown,
  Thro' which so gently Mercy smiled.

For humble was their love--with awe
  And trembling like some treasure kept,
That was not theirs by holy law--
Whose beauty with remorse they saw
  And o'er whose preciousness they wept.
Humility, that low, sweet root,
From which all heavenly virtues shoot,
Was in the hearts of both--but most
  In NAMA'S heart, by whom alone
Those charms, for which a heaven was lost.
  Seemed all unvalued and unknown;
And when her Seraph's eyes she caught,
  And hid hers glowing on his breast,
Even bliss was humbled by the thought--
  "What claim have I to be so blest"?
Still less could maid, so meek, have nurst
Desire of knowledge--that vain thirst,
With which the sex hath all been curst
From luckless EVE to her who near
The Tabernacle stole to hear
The secrets of the Angels: no--
  To love as her own Seraph loved,
With Faith, the same thro' bliss and woe--
  Faith that were even its light removed,
Could like the dial fixt remain
And wait till it shone out again;--
With Patience that tho' often bowed
  By the rude storm can rise anew;
And Hope that even from Evil's cloud
  See sunny Good half breaking thro'!
This deep, relying Love, worth more
In heaven than all a Cherub's lore--
This Faith more sure than aught beside
Was the sole joy, ambition, pride
Of her fond heart--the unreasoning scope
  Of all its views, above, below--
So true she felt it that to _hope_,
  To _trust_, is happier than to _know_.
And thus in humbleness they trod,
Abasht but pure before their God;
Nor e'er did earth behold a sight
  So meekly beautiful as they,
When with the altar's holy light
  Full on their brows they knelt to pray,
Hand within hand and side by side,
Two links of love awhile untied
From the great chain above, but fast
Holding together to the last!--
Two fallen Splendors from that tree[19]
Which buds with such eternally,
Shaken to earth yet keeping all
Their light and freshness in the fall.

Their only punishment, (as wrong,
  However sweet, must bear its brand.)
Their only doom was this--that, long
  As the green earth and ocean stand,
They both shall wander here--the same,
Throughout all time, in heart and frame--
Still looking to that goal sublime,
  Whose light remote but sure they see;
Pilgrims of Love whose way is Time,
  Whose home is in Eternity!
Subject the while to all the strife
True Love encounters in this life--
The wishes, hopes, he breathes in vain;
  The chill that turns his warmest sighs
  To earthly vapor ere they rise;
The doubt he feeds on and the pain
  That in his very sweetness lies:--
Still worse, the illusions that betray
  His footsteps to their shining brink;
That tempt him on his desert way
  Thro' the bleak world, to bend and drink,
Where nothing meets his lips, alas!--
But he again must sighing pass
On to that far-off home of peace,
In which alone his thirst will cease.

All this they bear but not the less
Have moments rich in happiness--
Blest meetings, after many a day
Of widowhood past far away,
When the loved face again is seen
Close, close, with not a tear between--
Confidings frank, without control,
Poured mutually from soul to soul;
As free from any fear or doubt
  As is that light from chill or strain
The sun into the stars sheds out
  To be by them shed back again!--
That happy minglement of hearts,
  Where, changed as chymic compounds are,
Each with its own existence parts
  To find a new one, happier far!
Such are their joys--and crowning all
  That blessed hope of the bright hour,
When, happy and no more to fall,
  Their spirits shall with freshened power
Rise up rewarded for their trust
  In Him from whom all goodness springs,
And shaking off earth's soiling dust
  From their emancipated wings,
Wander for ever thro' those skies
Of radiance where Love never dies!

In what lone region of the earth,
  These Pilgrims now may roam or dwell,
God and the Angels who look forth
  To watch their steps, alone can tell.
But should we in our wanderings
  Meet a young pair whose beauty wants
But the adornment of bright wings
  To look like heaven's inhabitants--
Who shine where'er they tread and yet
  Are humble in their earthly lot,
As is the way-side violet,
  That shines unseen, and were it not
  For its sweet breath would be forgot
Whose hearts in every thought are one,
  Whose voices utter the same wills--
Answering, as Echo doth some tone
  Of fairy music 'mong the hills,
So like itself we seek in vain
Which is the echo, which the strain--
Whose piety is love, whose love
  Tho' close as 'twere their souls' embrace.
Is not of earth but from above--
  Like two fair mirrors face to face,
Whose light from one to the other thrown,
Is heaven's reflection, not their own--
Should we e'er meet with aught so pure,
So perfect here, we may be sure
  'Tis ZARAPH and his bride we see;
And call young lovers round to view
The pilgrim pair as they pursue
  Their pathway towards eternity.


[1] "To which will be joined the sound of the bells hanging on the trees,
which will be put in motion by the wind proceeding from the Throne, so
often as the Blessed wish for music."--See _Sale's Koran, Prelim.
Dissert_.

[2] The ancient Persians supposed that this Throne was placed in the Sun,
and that through the stars were distributed the various classes of Angels
that encircled it. The Basilidians supposed that there were three hundred
and sixty-five orders of angels.

[3] It appears that, in most languages, the term employed for an angel
means also a messenger.

[4] The name given by the Mahometans to the infernal regions, over which,
they say, the angel Tabliek presides.

[5] The Kerubilna, as the Mussulmans call them, are often joined
indiscriminately with the Asrafil or Seraphim, under one common name of
Azazil, by which all spirits who approach near the throne of Alla are
designated.

[6] A belief that the stars are either spirits or the vehicles of spirits,
was common to all the religions and heresies of the East. Kircher has
given the names and stations of the seven archangels, who were by the
Cabala of the Jews distributed through the planets.

[7] According to the cosmogony of the ancient Persians, there were four
stars set as sentinels in the four quarters of the heavens, to watch over
the other fixed stars, and superintend the planets in their course. The
names of these four Sentinel stars are, according to the Boundesh,
Taschter, for the east; Satevis, for the west; Venand, for the south; and
Haftorang. for the north.

[8] Chavah, or, as it is Arabic, Havah (the name by which Adam called the
woman after their transgression), means "Life".

[9] Called by the Mussulmans Al Araf--a sort of wall or partition which,
according to the 7th chapter of the Koran, separates hell from paradise,
and where they, who have not merits sufficient to gain them immediate
admittance into heaven, are supposed to stand for a certain period,
alternately tantalized and tormented by the sights that are on either side
presented to them.

[10] I am aware that this happy saying of Lord Albemarle's loses much of
its grace and playfulness, by being put into the mouth of any but a human
lover.

[11] According to Whitehurst's theory, the mention of rainbows by an
antediluvian angel is an anachronism; as he says, "There was no rain
before the flood, and consequently no rainbow, which accounts for the
novelty of this sight after the Deluge."

[12] In acknowledging the authority of the great Prophets who had preceded
him, Mahomet represented his own mission as the final "_Seal_," or
consummation of them all.

[13] The Zodiacal Light.

[14] Pococke, however, gives it as the opinion of the Mahometan doctors,
that all souls, not only of men and of animals, living either on land or
in the sea, but of angels also, must necessarily taste of death.

[15] The Dove, or pigeon which attended Mahomet as his Familiar, and was
frequently seen to whisper into his ear, was, if I recollect right, one of
that select number of animals [including also the ant of Solomon, the dog
of the Seven Sleepers, etc.] which were thought by the Prophet worthy of
admission into Paradise.

[16] "Mohammed [says Sale], though a prophet, was not able to bear the
sight of Gabriel, when he appeared in his proper form, much less would
others be able to support it."

[17] Seth is a favorite personage among the Orientals, and acts a
conspicuous part in many of their most extravagant romances. The Syrians
pretended to have a Testament of this Patriarch in their possession, in
which was explained the whole theology of angels, their different orders,
etc. The Curds, too (as Hyde mentions in his Appendix), have a book, which
contains all the rites of their religion, and which they call Sohuph
Sheit, or the Book of Seth.

[18] The Seraphim, or Spirits of Divine Love.

[19] An allusion to the Sephiroths or Splendors of the Jewish Cabala,
represented as a tree, of which God is the crown or summit.








RHYMES ON THE ROAD.

EXTRACTED FROM THE JOURNAL OF
A TRAVELLING MEMBER OF
THE POCO-CURANTE SOCIETY,

1819.


The greater part of the following Rhymes were written or composed in an
old _calche_ for the purpose of beguiling the _ennui_ of solitary
travelling; and as verses made by a gentleman in his sleep, have been
lately called "a _psychological_ curiosity," it is to be hoped that
verses, composed by a gentleman to keep himself awake, may be honored with
some appellation equally Greek.






RHYMES ON THE ROAD




INTRODUCTORY RHYMES.


_Different Attitudes in which Authors compose.--Bayes, Henry Stevens,
Herodotus, etc.--Writing in Bed--in the Fields.--Plato and Sir Richard
Blackmore.--Fiddling with Gloves and Twigs.--Madame de Stal.--Rhyming on
the Road, in an old Calche_.


What various attitudes and ways
  And tricks we authors have in writing!
While some write sitting, some like BAYES
  Usually stand while they're inditing,
Poets there are who wear the floor out,
  Measuring a line at every stride;
While some like HENRY STEPHENS pour out
  Rhymes by the dozen while they ride.
HERODOTUS wrote most in bed;
  And RICHERAND, a French physician,
Declares the clock-work of the head
  Goes best in that reclined position.
If you consult MONTAIGNE and PLINY on
The subject, 'tis their joint opinion
That Thought its richest harvest yields
Abroad among the woods and fields,
That bards who deal in small retail
  At home may at their counters stop;
But that the grove, the hill, the vale,
  Are Poesy's true wholesale shop.
And verily I think they're right--
  For many a time on summer eves,
Just at that closing hour of light,
  When, like an Eastern Prince, who leaves
For distant war his Haram bowers,
The Sun bids farewell to the flowers,
Whose heads are sunk, whose tears are flowing
Mid all the glory of his going!--
Even _I_ have felt, beneath those beams,
  When wandering thro' the fields alone,
Thoughts, fancies, intellectual gleams,
  Which, far too bright to be my own,
Seemed lent me by the Sunny Power
That was abroad at that still hour.

If thus I've felt, how must _they_ feel,
  The few whom genuine Genius warms,
Upon whose soul he stamps his seal,
  Graven with Beauty's countless forms;--
The few upon this earth, who seem
Born to give truth to PLATO'S dream,
Since in their thoughts, as in a glass,
  Shadows of heavenly things appear.
Reflections of bright shapes that pass
  Thro' other worlds, above our sphere!
But this reminds me I digress;--
  For PLATO, too, produced, 'tis said,
(As one indeed might almost guess),
  His glorious visions all in bed.[1]
'Twas in his carriage the sublime
Sir RICHARD BLACKMORE used to rhyme;
  And (if the wits dont do him wrong)
Twixt death and epics past his time,[2]
  Scribbling and killing all day long--
Like Phoebus in his car, at ease,
  Now warbling forth a lofty song,
Now murdering the young Niobes.

There was a hero 'mong the Danes,
Who wrote, we're told, mid all the pains
  And horrors of exenteration,
Nine charming odes, which, if you'll look,
  You'll find preserved with a translation
By BARTHOLINOS in his book.
In short 'twere endless to recite
The various modes in which men write.
Some wits are only in the mind.
  When beaus and belles are round them prating;
Some when they dress for dinner find
  Their muse and valet both in waiting
And manage at the self-same time
To adjust a neckcloth and a rhyme.

Some bards there are who cannot scribble
Without a glove to tear or nibble
Or a small twig to whisk about--
  As if the hidden founts of Fancy,
Like wells of old, were thus found out
  By mystic trick of rhabdomancy.
Such was the little feathery wand,[3]
That, held for ever in the hand
Of her who won and wore the crown[4]
  Of female genius in this age,
Seemed the conductor that drew down
  Those words of lightning to her page.

As for myself--to come, at last,
  To the odd way in which _I_ write--
Having employ'd these few months past
  Chiefly in travelling, day and night,
I've got into the easy mode
Of rhyming thus along the road--
Making a way-bill of my pages,
Counting my stanzas by my stages--
'Twixt lays and _re_-lays no time lost--
In short, in two words, _writing post_.


[1] The only authority I know for imputing this practice to Plato and
Herodotus, is a Latin poem by M. de Valois on his Bed, in which he says:--

_Lucifer Herodotum vidit Vesperque cubantem, desedit totos heic Plato
saepe dies_.

[2] Sir Richard Blackmore was a physician, as well as a bad poet.

[3] Made of paper, twisted up like a fan or feather.

[4] Madame de Stal.






EXTRACT I.

Geneva.


_View of the Lake of Geneva from the Jura.[1]--Anxious to reach it
before the Sun went down.--Obliged to proceed on Foot.--Alps.--Mont
Blanc.--Effect of the Scene_.


'Twas late--the sun had almost shone
His last and best when I ran on
Anxious to reach that splendid view
Before the daybeams quite withdrew
And feeling as all feel on first
  Approaching scenes where, they are told,
Such glories on their eyes will burst
  As youthful bards in dreams behold.

'Twas distant yet and as I ran
  Full often was my wistful gaze
Turned to the sun who now began
  To call in all his out-posts rays,
And form a denser march of light,
Such as beseems a hero's flight.
Oh, how I wisht for JOSHUA'S power,
To stay the brightness of that hour?
But no--the sun still less became,
  Diminisht to a speck as splendid
And small as were those tongues of flame,
  That on the Apostles' heads descended!

'Twas at this instant--while there glowed
  This last, intensest gleam of light--
Suddenly thro' the opening road
  The valley burst upon my sight!
That glorious valley with its Lake
  And Alps on Alps in clusters swelling,
Mighty and pure and fit to make
  The ramparts of a Godhead's dwelling.

I stood entranced--as Rabbins say
  This whole assembled, gazing world
Will stand, upon that awful day,
  When the Ark's Light aloft unfurled
Among the opening clouds shall shine,
Divinity's own radiant sign!

Mighty MONT BLANC, thou wert to me
  That minute, with thy brow in heaven,
As sure a sign of Deity
  As e'er to mortal gaze was given.
Nor ever, were I destined yet
  To live my life twice o'er again,
Can I the deep-felt awe forget,
  The dream, the trance that rapt me then!

'Twas all that consciousness of power
And life, beyond this mortal hour;--
Those mountings of the soul within
At thoughts of Heaven--as birds begin
By instinct in the cage to rise,
When near their time for change of skies;--
That proud assurance of our claim
  To rank among the Sons of Light,
Mingled with shame--oh bitter shame!--
  At having riskt that splendid right,
For aught that earth thro' all its range
Of glories offers in exchange!
'Twas all this, at that instant brought
Like breaking sunshine o'er my thought--
'Twas all this, kindled to a glow
  Of sacred zeal which could it shine
Thus purely ever man might grow,
  Even upon earth a thing divine,
And be once more the creature made
To walk unstained the Elysian shade!

No, never shall I lose the trace
Of what I've felt in this bright place.
And should my spirit's hope grow weak,
  Should I, oh God! e'er doubt thy power,
This mighty scene again I'll seek,
  At the same calm and glowing hour,
And here at the sublimest shrine
  That Nature ever reared to Thee
Rekindle all that hope divine
  And _feel_ my immortality!


[1] Between Vattay and Gex.






EXTRACT II.

Geneva.

FATE OF GENEVA IN THE YEAR 1782.

A FRAGMENT.


Yes--if there yet live some of those,
Who, when this small Republic rose,
Quick as a startled hive of bees,
Against her leaguering enemies--[1]
When, as the Royal Satrap shook
  His well-known fetters at her gates,
Even wives and mothers armed and took
  Their stations by their sons and mates;
And on these walls there stood--yet, no,
  Shame to the traitors--_would_ have stood
As firm a band as e'er let flow
  At Freedom's base their sacred blood;
If those yet live, who on that night
When all were watching, girt for fight,
Stole like the creeping of a pest
From rank to rank, from breast to breast,
Filling the weak, the old with fears,
Turning the heroine's zeal to tears,--
Betraying Honor to that brink,
Where, one step more, and he must sink--
And quenching hopes which tho' the last,
Like meteors on a drowning mast,
Would yet have led to death more bright,
Than life e'er lookt, in all its light!
Till soon, too soon, distrust, alarms
  Throughout the embattled thousands ran,
And the high spirit, late in arms,
The zeal that might have workt such charms,
  Fell like a broken talisman--
Their gates, that they had sworn should be
  The gates of Death, that very dawn,
Gave passage widely, bloodlessly,
  To the proud foe--nor sword was drawn,
Nor even one martyred body cast
To stain their footsteps, as they past;
But of the many sworn at night
To do or die, some fled the sight,
Some stood to look with sullen frown,
  While some in impotent despair
Broke their bright armor and lay down,
  Weeping, upon the fragments there!--
If those, I say, who brought that shame,
That blast upon GENEVA'S name
Be living still--tho' crime so dark
  Shall hang up, fixt and unforgiven,
In History's page, the eternal mark
  For Scorn to pierce--so help me, Heaven,
I wish the traitorous slaves no worse,
  No deeper, deadlier disaster
From all earth's ills no fouler curse
  Than to have *********** their master!


[1] In the year 1782, when the forces of Berne, Sardinia, and France laid
siege to Geneva, and when, after a demonstration of heroism and
self-devotion, which promised to rival the feats of their ancestors in
1602 against Savoy, the Genevans, either panic-struck or betrayed, to the
surprise of all Europe, opened their gates to the besiegers, and submitted
without a struggle to the extinction of their liberties--See an account of
this Revolution in Coxe's Switzerland.






EXTRACT III.

Geneva.

_Fancy and Truth--Hippomenes and Atalanta. Mont Blanc.--Clouds_.


Even here in this region of wonders I find
That light-footed Fancy leaves Truth far behind;
Or at least like Hippomenes turns her astray
By the golden illusions he flings in her way.

What a glory it seemed the first evening I gazed!
MONT BLANC like a vision then suddenly raised
On the wreck of the sunset--and all his array
  Of high-towering Alps, touched still with a light
Far holier, purer than that of the Day,
  As if nearness to Heaven had made them so bright!
Then the dying at last of these splendors away
From peak after peak, till they left but a ray,
One roseate ray, that, too precious to fly,
  O'er the Mighty of Mountains still glowingly hung,
Like the last sunny step of ASTRAEA, when high,
  From the summit of earth to Elysium she sprung!
And those infinite Alps stretching out from the sight
Till they mingled with Heaven, now shorn of their light,
Stood lofty and lifeless and pale in the sky,
Like the ghosts of a Giant Creation gone by!

That scene--I have viewed it this evening again,
By the same brilliant light that hung over it then--
The valley, the lake in their tenderest charms--
  MONT BLANC in his awfullest pomp--and the whole
A bright picture of Beauty, reclined in the arms
  Of Sublimity, bridegroom elect of her soul!
But where are the mountains that round me at first
One dazzling horizon of miracles burst?
Those Alps beyond Alps, without end swelling on
Like the waves of eternity--where are _they_ gone?
Clouds--clouds--they were nothing but clouds, after all![1]
  That chain of MONT BLANC'S, which my fancy flew o'er,
With a wonder that naught on this earth can recall,
  Were but clouds of the evening and now are no more.

What a picture of Life's young illusions! Oh, Night,
Drop thy curtain at once and hide _all_ from my sight.


[1] It is often very difficult to distinguish between clouds and
Alps; and on the evening when I first saw this magnificent scene, the
clouds were so disposed along the whole horizon, as to deceive me into an
idea of the stupendous extent of these mountains, which my subsequent
observation was very far, of course, from confirming.






EXTRACT IV.

Milan.


_The Picture Gallery.--Albano's Rape of Proserpine.--Reflections.--
Universal Salvation.--Abraham sending away Agar, by Guercino.--Genius_.


Went to the _Brera_--saw a Dance of Loves
  By smooth ALBANO! him whose pencil teems
With Cupids numerous as in summer groves
  The leaflets are or motes in summer beams.

'Tis for the theft of Enna's flower from earth,
These urchins celebrate their dance of mirth
Round the green tree, like fays upon a heath--
  Those that are nearest linkt in order bright,
Cheek after cheek, like rose-buds in a wreath;
And those more distant showing from beneath
  The others' wings their little eyes of light.
While see! among the clouds, their eldest brother
  But just flown up tells with a smile of bliss
This prank of Pluto to his charmed mother
  Who turns to greet the tidings with a kiss!

Well might the Loves rejoice--and well did they
  Who wove these fables picture in their weaving
That blessed truth, (which in a darker day
  ORIGEN lost his saintship for believing,[1])--
That Love, eternal Love, whose fadeless ray
  Nor time nor death nor sin can overcast,
Even to the depths of hell will find his way,
  And soothe and heal and triumph there at last!
GUERCINO'S Agar--where the bondmaid hears
  From Abram's lips that he and she must part,
And looks at him with eyes all full of tears
  That seem the very last drops from her heart.
Exquisite picture!--let me not be told
Of minor faults, of coloring tame and cold--
If thus to conjure up a face so fair,[2]
So full of sorrow; with the story there
Of all that woman suffers when the stay
Her trusting heart hath leaned on falls away--
If thus to touch the bosom's tenderest spring,
By calling into life such eyes as bring
Back to our sad remembrance some of those
We've smiled and wept with in their joys and woes,
Thus filling them with tears, like tears we've known,
Till all the pictured grief becomes our own--
If _this_ be deemed the victory of Art--
  If thus by pen or pencil to lay bare
The deep, fresh, living fountains of the heart
  Before all eyes be Genius--it is _there_!


[1] The extension of the Divine Love ultimately even to the
regions of the damned.

[2] It is probable that this fine head is a portrait, as we find
it repeated in a picture by Guercino, which is in the possession of Signor
Carnuccini, the brother of the celebrated painter at Rome.






EXTRACT V.

Padua.


_Fancy and Reality.--Rain-drops and Lakes.--Plan of a Story.--Where to
place the Scene of it.--In some unknown Region.--Psalmanazar's Imposture
with respect to the Island of Formosa_.


The more I've viewed this world the more I've found,
  That, filled as 'tis with scenes and creatures rare.
Fancy commands within her own bright round
  A world of scenes and creatures far more fair.
Nor is it that her power can call up there
  A single charm, that's not from Nature won,
No more than rainbows in their pride can wear
  A single hue unborrowed from the sun--
But 'tis the mental medium it shines thro'
That lends to Beauty all its charm and hue;
As the same light that o'er the level lake
  One dull monotony of lustre flings,
Will, entering in the rounded raindrop, make
  Colors as gay as those on Peris' wings!

  And such, I deem, the difference between real,
Existing Beauty and that form ideal
Which she assumes when seen by poets' eyes,
Like sunshine in the drop--with all those dyes
Which Fancy's variegating prism supples.

I have a story of two lovers, filled
  With all the pure romance, the blissful sadness,
And the sad, doubtful bliss that ever thrilled
  Two young and longing hearts in that sweet madness.
But where to choose the region of my vision
  In this wide, vulgar world--what real spot
Can be found out sufficiently Elysian
  For two such perfect lovers I know not.
Oh for some fair FORMOSA, such as he,
The young Jew fabled of, in the Indian Sea,
By nothing but its name of Beauty known,
And which Queen Fancy might make all her own,
Her fairy kingdom--take its people, lands,
And tenements into her own bright hands,
And make at least one earthly corner fit
For Love to live in, pure and exquisite!






EXTRACT VI.

Venice.


_The Fall of Venice not to be lamented--Former Glory.--Expedition
against Constantinople.--Giustinianis.--Republic.--Characteristics of the
old Government.--Golden Book.--Brazen Mouths.--Spies.--Dungeons.--Present
Desolation_.


Mourn not for VENICE--let her rest
In ruin, 'mong those States unblest,
Beneath whose gilded hoofs of pride,
Where'er they trampled, Freedom died.
No--let us keep our tears for them,
  Where'er they pine, whose fall hath been
Not from a blood-stained diadem,
  Like that which deckt this ocean-queen,
But from high daring in the cause
  Of human Rights--the only good
And blessed strife, in which man draws
  His mighty sword on land or flood.

Mourn not for VENICE; tho' her fall
  Be awful, as if Ocean's wave
Swept o'er her, she deserves it all,
  And Justice triumphs o'er her grave.
Thus perish every King and State
  That run the guilty race she ran,
Strong but in ill and only great
  By outrage against God and man!

True, her high spirit is at rest,
  And all those days of glory gone,
When the world's waters, east and west,
  Beneath her white-winged commerce shone;
When with her countless barks she went
  To meet the Orient Empire's might.[1]
And her Giustinianis sent
  Their hundred heroes to that fight.

Vanisht are all her pomps, 'tis true,
But mourn them not--for vanisht too
  (Thanks to that Power, who soon or late,
  Hurls to the dust the guilty Great,)
Are all the outrage, falsehood, fraud,
  The chains, the rapine, and the blood,
That filled each spot, at home, abroad,
  Where the Republic's standard stood.
Desolate VENICE! when I track
Thy haughty course thro' centuries back;
Thy ruthless power, obeyed but curst--
  The stern machinery of thy State,
Which hatred would, like steam, have burst,
  Had stronger fear not chilled even hate;--
Thy perfidy, still worse than aught
Thy own unblushing SARPI[2] taught;--
Thy friendship which, o'er all beneath
Its shadow, rained down dews of death;[3]--
Thy Oligarchy's Book of Gold,
  Closed against humble Virtue's name,
But opened wide for slaves who sold
  Their native land to thee and shame;[4]--
Thy all-pervading host of spies
  Watching o'er every glance and breath,
Till men lookt in each others' eyes,
  To read their chance of life or death;--
Thy laws that made a mart of blood,
  And legalized the assassin's knife;[5]--
Thy sunless cells beneath the flood,
  And racks and Leads that burnt out life;--

When I review all this and see
The doom that now hath fallen on thee;
Thy nobles, towering once so proud,
Themselves beneath the yoke now bowed,--
A yoke by no one grace redeemed,
Such as of old around thee beamed,
But mean and base as e'er yet galled
Earth's tyrants when themselves enthralled,--
I feel the moral vengeance sweet.
And smiling o'er the wreck repeat:--
"Thus perish every King and State
  "That tread the steps which VENICE trod,
"Strong but in ill and only great,
  "By outrage against man and God!"


[1] Under the Doge Michaeli, in 1171.

[2] The celebrated Fra Paolo. The collections of Maxims which this bold
monk drew up at the request of the Venetian Government, for the guidance
of the Secret Inquisition of State, are so atrocious as to seem rather an
over-charged satire upon despotism, than a system of policy, seriously
inculcated, and but too readily and constantly pursued.

[3] Conduct of Venice towards her allies and dependencies, particularly to
unfortunate Padua.

[4] Among those admitted to the honor of being inscribed in the _Libro
d'oro_ were some families of Brescia, Treviso, and other places, whose
only claim to that distinction was the zeal with which they prostrated
themselves and their country at the feet of the republic.

[5] By the infamous statutes of the State Inquisition, not only was
assassination recognized as a regular mode of punishment, but this secret
power over life was delegated to their minions at a distance, with nearly
as much facility as a licence is given under the game laws of England. The
only restriction seems to have been the necessity of applying for a new
certificate, after every individual exercise of the power.






EXTRACT VII.

Venice.


_Lord Byron's Memoirs, written by himself.--Reflections, when about to
read them_.


Let me a moment--ere with fear and hope
Of gloomy, glorious things, these leaves I ope--
As one in fairy tale to whom the key
  Of some enchanter's secret halls is given,
Doubts while he enters slowly, tremblingly,
  If he shall meet with shapes from hell or heaven--
Let me a moment think what thousands live
O'er the wide earth this instant who would give,
Gladly, whole sleepless nights to bend the brow
Over these precious leaves, as I do now.

How all who know--and where is he unknown?
To what far region have his songs not flown,
Like PSAPHON'S birds[1] speaking their master's name,
In every language syllabled by Fame?--
How all who've felt the various spells combined
Within the circle of that mastermind,--
Like spells derived from many a star and met
Together in some wondrous amulet,--
Would burn to know when first the Light awoke
In his young soul,--and if the gleams that broke
From that Aurora of his genius, raised
Most pain or bliss in those on whom they blazed;
Would love to trace the unfolding of that power,
Which had grown ampler, grander, every hour;
And feel in watching o'er his first advance
  As did the Egyptian traveller[2] when he stood
By the young Nile and fathomed with his lance
  The first small fountains of that mighty flood.

They too who mid the scornful thoughts that dwell
  In his rich fancy, tingeing all its streams,--
As if the Star of Bitterness which fell
  On earth of old,[3] had touched them with its beams,--
Can track a spirit which tho' driven to hate,
From Nature's hands came kind, affectionate;
And which even now, struck as it is with blight,
Comes out at times in love's own native light;--
How gladly all who've watched these struggling rays
Of a bright, ruined spirit thro' his lays,
Would here inquire, as from his own frank lips,
  What desolating grief, what wrongs had driven
That noble nature into cold eclipse;
  Like some fair orb that, once a sun in heaven.
And born not only to surprise but cheer
With warmth and lustre all within its sphere,
Is now so quenched that of its grandeur lasts
Naught but the wide, cold shadow which it casts.

Eventful volume! whatsoe'er the change
Of scene and clime--the adventures bold and strange--
The griefs--the frailties but too frankly told--
The loves, the feuds thy pages may unfold,
If Truth with half so prompt a hand unlocks
  His virtues as his failings, we shall find
The record there of friendships held like rocks,
  And enmities like sun-touched snow resigned;
Of fealty, cherisht without change or chill,
In those who served him, young, and serve him still;
Of generous aid given, with that noiseless art
Which wakes not pride, to many a wounded heart;
Of acts--but, no--_not_ from himself must aught
Of the bright features of his life be sought.

While they who court the world, like Milton's cloud,
"Turn forth their silver lining" on the crowd,
This gifted Being wraps himself in night;
  And keeping all that softens and adorns
And gilds his social nature hid from sight,
  Turns but its darkness on a world he scorns.


[1] Psaphon, in order to attract the attention of the world, taught
multitudes of birds to speak his name, and then let them fly away in
various directions; whence the proverb, "Psaphonis aves."

[2] Bruce.

[3] "And the name of the star is called Wormwood, and the third part of
the waters became wormwood."--_Rev_. viii.






EXTRACT VIII.

Venice.


_Female Beauty at Venice.--No longer what it was in the time of Titian.--
His mistress.--Various Forms in which he has painted her.--Venus.--Divine
and profane Love.--La Fragilita d'Amore--Paul Veronese.--His Women.--
Marriage of Cana.--Character of Italian Beauty.--Raphael's Fornarina.--
Modesty_.


Thy brave, thy learned have passed away:
Thy beautiful!--ah, where are they?
The forms, the faces that once shone,
  Models of grace, in Titian's eye,
Where are they now, while flowers live on
  In ruined places, why, oh! why
  Must Beauty thus with Glory die?
That maid whose lips would still have moved,
  Could art have breathed a spirit through them;
Whose varying charms her artist loved
  More fondly every time he drew them,
(So oft beneath his touch they past,
Each semblance fairer than the last);
Wearing each shape that Fancy's range
  Offers to Love--yet still the one
Fair idol seen thro' every change,
  Like facets of some orient stone,--
  In each the same bright image shown.
Sometimes a Venus, unarrayed
  But in her beauty[1]--sometimes deckt
In costly raiment, as a maid
  That kings might for a throne select.[2]
Now high and proud, like one who thought
The world should at her feet be brought;
Now with a look reproachful sad,[3]--
Unwonted look from brow so glad,--
And telling of a pain too deep
For tongue to speak or eyes to weep.
Sometimes thro' allegory's veil,
  In double semblance seemed to shine,
Telling a strange and mystic tale
  Of Love Profane and Love Divine[4]--
Akin in features, but in heart
As far as earth and heaven apart.
Or else (by quaint device to prove
The frailty of all worldly love)
Holding a globe of glass as thin
  As air-blown bubbles in her hand,
With a young Love confined therein,
  Whose wings seem waiting to expand--
And telling by her anxious eyes
That if that frail orb break he flies.[5]

Thou too with touch magnificent,
PAUL of VERONA!--where are they?
The oriental forms[6] that lent
Thy canvas such a bright array?
Noble and gorgeous dames whose dress
Seems part of their own loveliness;
Like the sun's drapery which at eve
The floating clouds around him weave
Of light they from himself receive!
Where is there now the living face
  Like those that in thy nuptial throng[7]
By their superb, voluptuous grace,
Make us forget the time, the place,
  The holy guests they smile among,--
Till in that feast of heaven-sent wine
We see no miracles but thine.

If e'er, except in Painting's dream,
There bloomed such beauty here, 'tis gone,--
Gone like the face that in the stream
  Of Ocean for an instant shone,
When Venus at that mirror gave
A last look ere she left the wave.
And tho', among the crowded ways,
We oft are startled by the blaze
  Of eyes that pass with fitful light.
Like fire-flies on the wing at night[8]
'Tis not that nobler beauty given
To show how angels look in heaven.
Even in its shape most pure and fair,
'Tis Beauty with but half her zone,
All that can warm the sense is there,
  But the Soul's deeper charm has flown:--
'Tis RAPHAEL's Fornarina,--warm,
  Luxuriant, arch, but unrefined;
A flower round which the noontide swarm
  Of young Desires may buzz and wind,
But where true Love no treasure meets
Worth hoarding in his hive of sweets.

Ah no,--for this and for the hue
  Upon the rounded cheek, which tells
How fresh within the heart this dew
  Of love's unrifled sweetness dwells,
We must go back to our own Isles,
  Where Modesty, which here but gives
A rare and transient grace to smiles,
  In the heart's holy centre lives;
And thence as from her throne diffuses
  O'er thoughts and looks so bland a reign,
That not a thought or feeling loses
  Its freshness in that gentle chain.


[1] In the Tribune at Florence.

[2] In the Palazzo Pitti.

[3] Alludes particularly to the portrait of her in the Sciarra collection
at Rome, where the look of mournful reproach in those full, shadowy eyes,
as if she had been unjustly accused of something wrong, is exquisite.

[4] The fine picture in the Palazzo Borghese, called (it is not easy to
say why) "Sacred and Profane Love," in which the two figures, sitting on
the edge of the fountain, are evidently portraits of the same person.

[5] This fanciful allegory is the subject of a picture by Titian in the
possession of the Marquis Cambian at Turin, whose collection, though
small, contains some beautiful specimens of all the great masters.

[6] As Paul Veronese gave but little into the _beau idal_, his women
may be regarded as pretty close imitations of the living models which
Venice afforded in his time.

[7] The Marriage of Cana.

[8] "Certain it is [as Arthur Young truly and feelingly says] one now and
then meets with terrible eyes in Italy."






EXTRACT IX.

Venice.


_The English to be met with everywhere.--Alps and Threadneedle
Street.--The Simplon and the Stocks.--Rage for travelling.--Blue Stockings
among the Wahabees.--Parasols and Pyramids.--Mrs. Hopkins and the Wall of
China_.


And is there then no earthly place,
  Where we can rest in dream Elysian,
Without some curst, round English face,
  Popping up near to break the vision?
Mid northern lakes, mid southern vines,
  Unholy cits we're doomed to meet;
Nor highest Alps nor Apennines
  Are sacred from Threadneedle Street!

If up the Simplon's path we wind,
Fancying we leave this world behind,
Such pleasant sounds salute one's ear
As--"Baddish news from 'Change, my dear--
"The funds--(phew I curse this ugly hill)--
"Are lowering fast--(what, higher still?)--
"And--(zooks, we're mounting up to heaven!)--
"Will soon be down to sixty-seven."

Go where we may--rest where we will.
Eternal London haunts us still.
The trash of Almack's or Fleet Ditch--
And scarce a pin's head difference _which_--
Mixes, tho' even to Greece we run,
With every rill from Helicon!
And if this rage for travelling lasts,
If Cockneys of all sects and castes,
Old maidens, aldermen, and squires,
_Will_ leave their puddings and coal fires,
To gape at things in foreign lands
No soul among them understands;
If Blues desert their coteries,
To show off 'mong the Wahabees;
If neither sex nor age controls,
  Nor fear of Mamelukes forbids
Young ladies with pink parasols
  To glide among the Pyramids--

Why, then, farewell all hope to find
A spot that's free from London-kind!
Who knows, if to the West we roam,
But we may find some _Blue_ "at home"
  Among the Blacks of Carolina--
Or flying to the Eastward see
Some Mrs. HOPKINS taking tea
  And toast upon the Wall of China!






EXTRACT X.

Mantua.


_Verses of Hippolyta to her Husband_.


They tell me thou'rt the favored guest
  Of every fair and brilliant throng;
No wit like thine to wake the jest,
  No voice like thine to breathe the song.
And none could guess, so gay thou art,
That thou and I are far apart.
Alas, alas! how different flows,
  With thee and me the time away!
Not that I wish thee sad, heaven knows--
  Still if thou canst, be light and gay;
I only know that without thee
The sun himself is dark for me.

Do I put on the jewels rare
Thou'st always loved to see me wear?
Do I perfume the locks that thou
So oft hast braided o'er my brow,
Thus deckt thro' festive crowds to run,
  And all the assembled world to see,--
All but the one, the absent one,
  Worth more than present worlds to me!
No, nothing cheers this widowed heart--
My only joy from thee apart,
From thee thyself, is sitting hours
  And days before thy pictured form--
That dream of thee, which Raphael's powers
  Have made with all but life-breath warm!
And as I smile to it, and say
The words I speak to thee in play,
I fancy from their silent frame,
Those eyes and lips give back the same:
And still I gaze, and still they keep
Smiling thus on me--till I weep!
Our little boy too knows it well,
  For there I lead him every day
And teach his lisping lips to tell
  The name of one that's far away.
Forgive me, love, but thus alone
My time is cheered while thou art gone.






EXTRACT XI.

Florence.


No--'tis not the region where Love's to be found--
  They have bosoms that sigh, they have glances that rove,
They have language a Sappho's own lip might resound,
  When she warbled her best--but they've nothing like Love.

Nor is't that pure _sentiment_ only they want,
  Which Heaven for the mild and the tranquil hath made--
Calm, wedded affection, that home-rooted plant
  Which sweetens seclusion and smiles in the shade;

That feeling which, after long years have gone by,
  Remains like a portrait we've sat for in youth,
Where, even tho' the flush of the colors may fly,
  The features still live in their first smiling truth;

That union where all that in Woman is kind,
  With all that in Man most ennoblingly towers,
Grow wreathed into one--like the column, combined
  Of the _strength_ of the shaft and the capital's _flowers_.

Of this--bear ye witness, ye wives, everywhere,
  By the ARNO, the PO, by all ITALY'S streams--
Of this heart-wedded love, so delicious to share,
  Not a husband hath even one glimpse in his dreams.

But it _is_ not this only;--born full of the light
  Of a sun from whose fount the luxuriant festoons
Of these beautiful valleys drink lustre so bright
  That beside him our suns of the north are but moons,--

We might fancy at least, like their climate they burned;
  And that Love tho' unused in this region of spring
To be thus to a tame Household Deity turned,
  Would yet be all soul when abroad on the wing.

And there _may_ be, there _are_ those explosions of heart
  Which burst when the senses have first caught the flame;
Such fits of the blood as those climates impart,
  Where Love is a sun-stroke that maddens the frame.

But that Passion which springs in the depth of the soul;
  Whose beginnings are virginly pure as the source
Of some small mountain rivulet destined to roll
  As a torrent ere long, losing peace in its course--

A course to which Modesty's struggle but lends
  A more headlong descent without chance of recall;
But which Modesty even to the last edge attends,
  And then throws a halo of tears round its fall!

This exquisite Passion--ay, exquisite, even
  Mid the ruin its madness too often hath made,
As it keeps even then a bright trace of the heaven,
  That heaven of Virtue from which it has strayed--

This entireness of love which can only be found,
Where Woman like something that's holy, watched over,
And fenced from her childhood with purity round,
Comes body and soul fresh as Spring to a lover!

Where not an eye answers, where not a hand presses,
Till spirit with spirit in sympathy move;
And the Senses asleep in their sacred recesses
Can only be reached thro' the temple of Love!--

This perfection of Passion-how can it be found,
Where the mystery Nature hath hung round the tie
By which souls are together attracted and bound,
Is laid open for ever to heart,
ear and eye;--

Where naught of that innocent doubt can exist,
That ignorance even than knowledge more bright,
Which circles the young like the morn's sunny mist,
And curtains them round in their own native light;--

Where Experience leaves nothing for Love to reveal,
Or for Fancy in visions to gleam o'er the thought:
But the truths which alone we would die to conceal
From the maiden's young heart are the only ones taught.

No, no, 'tis not here, howsoever we sigh,
Whether purely to Hymen's one planet we pray,
Or adore, like Sabaeans, each light of Love's sky,
Here is not the region to fix or to stray.

For faithless in wedlock, in gallantry gross,
Without honor to guard, to reserve, to restrain,
What have they a husband can mourn as a loss?
What have they a lover can prize as a gain?






EXTRACT XII.

Florence.


_Music in Italy.--Disappointed by it.--Recollections or other Times and
Friends.--Dalton.--Sir John Stevenson.--His Daughter.--Musical Evenings
together_.


If it be true that Music reigns,
  Supreme, in ITALY'S soft shades,
'Tis like that Harmony so famous,
Among the spheres, which He of SAMOS
Declared had such transcendent merit
That not a soul on earth could hear it;
For, far as I have come--from Lakes,
Whose sleep the Tramontana breaks,
Thro' MILAN and that land which gave
The Hero of the rainbow vest[1]--
By MINCIO'S banks, and by that wave,
Which made VERONA'S bard so blest--
Places that (like the Attic shore,
Which rung back music when the sea
Struck on its marge) should be all o'er
Thrilling alive with melody--
I've heard no music--not a note
Of such sweet native airs as float
In my own land among the throng
And speak our nation's soul for song.

Nay, even in higher walks, where Art
Performs, as 'twere, the gardener's part,
And richer if not sweeter makes
The flowers she from the wild-hedge takes--
Even there, no voice hath charmed my ear,
  No taste hath won my perfect praise,
Like thine, dear friend[2]--long, truly dear--
  Thine, and thy loved OLIVIA'S lays.
She, always beautiful, and growing
  Still more so every note she sings--
Like an inspired young Sibyl,[3] glowing
  With her own bright imaginings!
And thou, most worthy to be tied
  In music to her, as in love,
Breathing that language by her side,
  All other language far above,
Eloquent Song--whose tones and words
In every heart find answering chords!

How happy once the hours we past,
  Singing or listening all daylong,
Till Time itself seemed changed at last
  To music, and we lived in song!
Turning the leaves of HAYDN o'er,
  As quick beneath her master hand
They opened all their brilliant store,
  Like chambers, touched by fairy wand;
Or o'er the page of MOZART bending,
  Now by his airy warblings cheered,
Now in his mournful _Requiem_ blending
  Voices thro' which the heart was heard.
And still, to lead our evening choir,
Was He invoked, thy loved-one's Sire[4]--
He who if aught of grace there be
  In the wild notes I write or sing,
First smoothed their links of harmony,
  And lent them charms they did not bring;--
He, of the gentlest, simplest heart,
With whom, employed in his sweet art,
(That art which gives this world of ours
  A notion how they speak in heaven.)
I've past more bright and charmed hours
  Than all earth's wisdom could have given.
Oh happy days, oh early friends,
  How Life since then hath lost its flowers!
But yet--tho' Time _some_ foliage rends,
  The stem, the Friendship, still is ours;
And long may it endure, as green
And fresh as it hath always been!

How I have wandered from my theme!
  But where is he, that could return
To such cold subjects from a dream,
  Thro' which these best of feelings burn?--
Not all the works of Science, Art,
  Or Genius in this world are worth
One genuine sigh that from the heart
  Friendship or Love draws freshly forth.


[1] Bermago--the birthplace, it is said, of Harlequin.

[2] Edward Tuite Dalton, the first husband of Sir John Stevenson's
daughter, the late Marchioness of Headfort.

[3] Such as those of Domenichino in the Palazza Borghese, at the
Capitol, etc.

[4] Sir John Stevenson.






EXTRACT XIII.

Rome.


_Reflections on reading Du Cerceau's Account of the Conspiracy of
Rienzi, in 1347.--The Meeting of the Conspirators on the Night of the 19th
of May.--Their Procession in the Morning to the Capitol.--Rienzi's
Speech_.


'Twas a proud moment--even to hear the words
  Of Truth and Freedom mid these temples breathed,
And see once more the Forum shine with swords
  In the Republic's sacred name unsheathed--
That glimpse, that vision of a brighter day
  For his dear ROME, must to a Roman be,
Short as it was, worth ages past away
  In the dull lapse of hopeless slavery.

'Twas on a night of May, beneath that moon
Which had thro' many an age seen Time untune
The strings of this Great Empire, till it fell
From his rude hands, a broken, silent shell--
The sound of the church clock near ADRIAN'S Tomb
Summoned the warriors who had risen for ROME,
To meet unarmed,--with none to watch them there,
But God's own eye,--and pass the night in prayer.
Holy beginning of a holy cause,
When heroes girt for Freedom's combat pause
Before high Heaven, and humble in their might
Call down its blessing on that coming fight.

At dawn, in arms went forth the patriot band;
And as the breeze, fresh from the TIBER, fanned
Their gilded gonfalons, all eyes could see
  The palm-tree there, the sword, the keys of Heaven--
Types of the justice, peace and liberty,
  That were to bless them when their chains were riven.
On to the Capitol the pageant moved,
  While many a Shade of other times, that still
Around that grave of grandeur sighing roved,
  Hung o'er their footsteps up the Sacred Hill
And heard its mournful echoes as the last
High-minded heirs of the Republic past.
'Twas then that thou, their Tribune,[1] (name which brought
Dreams of lost glory to each patriot's thought,)
Didst, with a spirit Rome in vain shall seek
To wake up in her sons again, thus speak:--
"ROMANS, look round you--on this sacred place
  "There once stood shrines and gods and godlike men.
"What see you now? what solitary trace
  "Is left of all that made ROME'S glory then?
"The shrines are sunk, the Sacred Mount bereft
  "Even of its name--and nothing now remains
"But the deep memory of that glory, left
  "To whet our pangs and aggravate our chains!
"But _shall_ this be?--our sun and sky the same,--
  "Treading the very soil our fathers trod,--
"What withering curse hath fallen on soul and frame,
  "What visitation hath there come from God
"To blast our strength and rot us into slaves,
"_Here_ on our great forefathers' glorious graves?
"It cannot be--rise up, ye Mighty Dead,--
  "If we, the living, are too weak to crush
"These tyrant priests that o'er your empire tread,
  "Till all but Romans at Rome's tameness blush!

"Happy, PALMYRA, in thy desert domes
  "Where only date-trees sigh and serpents hiss;
"And thou whose pillars are but silent homes
  "For the stork's brood, superb PERSEPOLIS!
"Thrice happy both, that your extinguisht race
"Have left no embers--no half-living trace--
"No slaves to crawl around the once proud spot,
"Till past renown in present shame's forgot.
"While ROME, the Queen of all, whose very wrecks,
  "If lone and lifeless thro' a desert hurled,
"Would wear more true magnificence than decks
  "The assembled thrones of all the existing world--
"ROME, ROME alone, is haunted, stained and curst,
  "Thro' every spot her princely TIBER laves,
"By living human things--the deadliest, worst,
  "This earth engenders--tyrants and their slaves!
"And we--oh shame!--we who have pondered o'er
  "The patriot's lesson and the poet's lay;[2]
"Have mounted up the streams of ancient lore,
  "Tracking our country's glories all the way--
"Even _we_ have tamely, basely kist the ground
  "Before that Papal Power,--that Ghost of Her,
"The World's Imperial Mistress--sitting crowned
  "And ghastly on her mouldering sepulchre![3]
"But this is past:--too long have lordly priests
  "And priestly lords led us, with all our pride
"Withering about us--like devoted beasts,
  "Dragged to the shrine, with faded garlands tied.
"'Tis o'er--the dawn of our deliverance breaks!
"Up from his sleep of centuries awakes
"The Genius of the Old Republic, free
"As first he stood, in chainless majesty,
"And sends his voice thro' ages yet to come,
"Proclaiming ROME, ROME, ROME, Eternal ROME!"


[1] Rienzi.

[2] The fine Canzone of Petrarch, beginning _"Spirto gentil,"_ is
supposed, by Voltaire and others, to have been addressed to Rienzi; but
there is much more evidence of its having been written, as Ginguen
asserts, to the young Stephen Colonna, on his being created a Senator of
Rome.

[3] This image is borrowed from Hobbes, whose words are, as near as I can
recollect:--"For what is the Papacy, but the Ghost of the old Roman
Empire, sitting crowned on the grave thereof?"




EXTRACT XIV.

Rome.


_Fragment of a Dream.--The great Painters supposed to be Magicians.--The
Beginnings of the Art.--Gildings on the Glories and Draperies.--
Improvements under Giotto, etc.--The first Dawn of the true Style in
Masaccio.--Studied by all the great Artists who followed him.--Leonardo da
Vinci, with whom commenced the Golden Age of Painting.--His Knowledge of
Mathematics and of Music.--His female heads all like each other.--
Triangular Faces.--Portraits of Mona Lisa, etc.--Picture of Vanity and
Modesty.--His_ chef-d'oeuvre, _the Last Supper.--Faded and almost
effaced_.


Filled with the wonders I had seen
  In Rome's stupendous shrines and halls,
I felt the veil of sleep serene
Come o'er the memory of each scene,
  As twilight o'er the landscape falls.
Nor was it slumber, sound and deep,
  But such as suits a poet's rest--
That sort of thin, transparent sleep,
  Thro' which his day-dreams shine the best.
Methought upon a plain I stood,
  Where certain wondrous men, 'twas said,
With strange, miraculous power endued,
  Were coming each in turn to shed
His art's illusions o'er the sight
And call up miracles of light.
The sky above this lonely place,
  Was of that cold, uncertain hue,
The canvas wears ere, warmed apace,
  Its bright creation dawns to view.

But soon a glimmer from the east
  Proclaimed the first enchantments nigh;[1]
And as the feeble light increased,
  Strange figures moved across the sky,
With golden glories deckt and streaks
  Of gold among their garments' dyes;[2]
And life's resemblance tinged their cheeks,
  But naught of life was in their eyes;--
Like the fresh-painted Dead one meets,
Borne slow along Rome's mournful streets.

But soon these figures past away;
  And forms succeeded to their place
With less of gold in their array,
  But shining with more natural grace,
And all could see the charming wands
Had past into more gifted hands.
Among these visions there was one,[3]
Surpassing fair, on which the sun,
That instant risen, a beam let fall,
  Which thro' the dusky twilight trembled.
And reached at length the spot where all
  Those great magicians stood assembled.
And as they turned their heads to view
  The shining lustre, I could trace
The bright varieties it threw
  On each uplifted studying face:[4]
While many a voice with loud acclaim
Called forth, "Masaccio" as the name
Of him, the Enchanter, who had raised
This miracle on which all gazed.

'Twas daylight now--the sun had risen
  From out the dungeon of old Night.--
Like the Apostle from his prison
  Led by the Angel's hand of light;
And--as the fetters, when that ray
Of glory reached them, dropt away.[5]
So fled the clouds at touch of day!
Just then a bearded sage came forth,[6]
  Who oft in thoughtful dream would stand,
To trace upon the dusky earth
  Strange learned figures with his wand;
And oft he took the silver lute
  His little page behind him bore,
And waked such music as, when mute,
  Left in the soul a thirst for more!

Meanwhile his potent spells went on,
  And forms and faces that from out
A depth of shadow mildly shone
  Were in the soft air seen about.
Tho' thick as midnight stars they beamed,
Yet all like living sisters seemed,
So close in every point resembling
  Each other's beauties--from the eyes
Lucid as if thro' crystal trembling,
  Yet soft as if suffused with sighs,
To the long, fawn-like mouth, and chin,
  Lovelily tapering, less and less,
  Till by this very charm's excess,
Like virtue on the verge of sin,
  It touched the bounds of ugliness.
Here lookt as when they lived the shades
Of some of Arno's dark-eyed maids--
Such maids as should alone live on
In dreams thus when their charms are gone:
Some Mona Lisa on whose eyes
  A painter for whole years might gaze,[7]
Nor find in all his pallet's dyes
  One that could even approach their blaze!
Here float two spirit shapes,[8] the one,
With her white fingers to the sun
Outspread as if to ask his ray
Whether it e'er had chanced to play
On lilies half so fair as they!
This self-pleased nymph was Vanity--
And by her side another smiled,
  In form as beautiful as she,
But with that air subdued and mild,
  That still reserve of purity,
Which is to beauty like the haze
  Of evening to some sunny view,
Softening such charms as it displays
  And veiling others in that hue,
  Which fancy only can see thro'!
This phantom nymph, who could she be,
But the bright Spirit, Modesty?

Long did the learned enchanter stay
  To weave his spells and still there past,
As in the lantern's shifting play
Group after group in close array,
  Each fairer, grander, than the last.
But the great triumph of his power
  Was yet to come:--gradual and slow,
(As all that is ordained to tower
  Among the works of man must grow,)
The sacred vision stole to view,
  In that half light, half shadow shown,
Which gives to even the gayest hue
  A sobered, melancholy tone.
It was a vision of that last,[9]
Sorrowful night which Jesus past
With his disciples when he said
  Mournfully to them--"I shall be
"Betrayed by one who here hath fed
  "This night at the same board with me."
And tho' the Saviour in the dream
Spoke not these words, we saw them beam
Legibly in his eyes (so well
The great magician workt his spell),
And read in every thoughtful line
Imprinted on that brow divine.

The meek, the tender nature, grieved,
Not angered to be thus deceived--
Celestial love requited ill
For all its care, yet loving still--
Deep, deep regret that there should fall
  From man's deceit so foul a blight
Upon that parting hour--and all
  _His_ Spirit must have felt that night.
Who, soon to die for human-kind,
  Thought only, mid his mortal pain,
How many a soul was left behind
  For whom he died that death in vain!

Such was the heavenly scene--alas!
That scene so bright so soon should pass
But pictured on the humid air,
Its tints, ere long, grew languid there;[10]
And storms came on, that, cold and rough,
  Scattered its gentlest glories all--
As when the baffling winds blow off
  The hues that hang o'er Terni's fall,--
Till one by one the vision's beams
  Faded away and soon it fled.
To join those other vanisht dreams
  That now flit palely 'mong the dead,--
The shadows of those shades that go.
Around Oblivion's lake below!


[1] The paintings of those artists who were introduced into Venice and
Florence from Greece.

[2] Margaritone of Orezzo, who was a pupil and imitator of the Greeks, is
said to have invented this art of gilding the ornaments of pictures, a
practice which, though it gave way to a purer taste at the beginning of
the 16th century, was still occasionally used by many of the great
masters: as by Raphael in the ornaments of the Fornarina, and by Rubens
not unfrequently in glories and flames.

[3] The works of Masaccio.--For the character of this powerful and
original genius, see Sir Joshua Reynolds's twelfth discourse. His
celebrated frescoes are in the church of St. Pietro del Carmine, at
Florence.

[4] All the great artists studies, and many of them borrowed from
Masaccio. Several figures in the Cartoons of Raphael are taken, with but
little alteration, from his frescoes.

[5] "And a light shined in the prison ... and his chains fell off from his
hands."--_Acts_.

[6] Leonardo da Vinci.

[7] He is said to have been four years employed upon the portrait of this
fair Florentine, without being able, after all, to come up to his idea of
her beauty.

[8] Vanity and Modesty in the collection of Cardinal Fesch, at Rome. The
composition of the four hands here is rather awkward, but the picture,
altogether, is very delightful. There is a repetition of the subject in
the possession of Lucien Bonaparte.

[9] The Last Supper of Leonardo da Vinci, which is in the Refectory of the
Convent delle Grazie at Milan.

[10] Leonardo appears to have used a mixture of oil and varnish for this
picture, which alone, without the various other causes of its ruin, would
have prevented any long duration of its beauties. It is now almost
entirely effaced.






EXTRACT XV.

Rome.


_Mary Magdalen.--Her Story.--Numerous Pictures of her.--Correggio--Guido
--Raphael, etc.--Canova's two exquisite Statues.--The Somariva Magdalen.
--Chantrey's Admiration of Canova's Works_.


No wonder, MARY, that thy story
  Touches all hearts--for there we see thee.
The soul's corruption and its glory,
  Its death and life combine in thee.

From the first moment when we find
  Thy spirit haunted by a swarm
Of dark desires,--like demons shrined
  Unholily in that fair form,--
Till when by touch of Heaven set free,
  Thou camest, with those bright locks of gold
(So oft the gaze of BETHANY),
  And covering in their precious fold
Thy Saviour's feet didst shed such tears
As paid, each drop, the sins of years!--
Thence on thro' all thy course of love
  To Him, thy Heavenly Master,--Him
Whose bitter death-cup from above
  Had yet this cordial round the brim,
That woman's faith and love stood fast
And fearless by Him to the last:--
Till, oh! blest boon for truth like thine!
  Thou wert of all the chosen one,
Before whose eyes that Face Divine
  When risen from the dead first shone;
That thou might'st see how, like a cloud,
Had past away its mortal shroud,
And make that bright revealment known
To hearts less trusting than thy own.
All is affecting, cheering, grand;
  The kindliest record ever given,
Even under God's own kindly hand,
  Of what repentance wins from Heaven!

No wonder, MARY, that thy face,
  In all its touching light of tears,
Should meet us in each holy place,
  Where Man before his God appears,
Hopeless--were he not taught to see
All hope in Him who pardoned thee!
No wonder that the painter's skill
  Should oft have triumpht in the power
Of keeping thee all lovely still
  Even in thy sorrow's bitterest hour;
That soft CORREGGIO should diffuse
  His melting shadows round thy form;
That GUIDO'S pale, unearthly hues
  Should in portraying thee grow warm;
That all--from the ideal, grand,
Inimitable Roman hand,
Down to the small, enameling touch
  Of smooth CARLINO--should delight
In picturing her, "who loved so much,"
  And was, in spite of sin, so bright!

  But MARY, 'mong these bold essays
Of Genius and of Art to raise
A semblance of those weeping eyes--
  A vision worthy of the sphere
Thy faith has earned thee in the skies,
  And in the hearts of all men here,--
None e'er hath matched, in grief or grace,
CANOVA'S day-dream of thy face,
In those bright sculptured forms, more bright
With true expression's breathing light,
Than ever yet beneath the stroke
Of chisel into life awoke.
The one,[1] portraying what thou wert
  In thy first grief,--while yet the flower
Of those young beauties was unhurt
  By sorrow's slow, consuming power;
And mingling earth's seductive grace
  With heaven's subliming thoughts so well,
We doubt, while gazing, in _which_ place
  Such beauty was most formed to dwell!--
The other, as thou look'dst, when years
Of fasting, penitence and tears
Had worn thy frame;--and ne'er did Art
  With half such speaking power express
The ruin which a breaking heart
  Spreads by degrees o'er loveliness.
Those wasting arms, that keep the trace,
Even still, of all their youthful grace,
That loosened hair of which thy brow
Was once so proud,--neglected now!--
Those features even in fading worth
  The freshest bloom to others given,
And those sunk eyes now lost to earth
  But to the last still full of heaven!

Wonderful artist! praise, like mine--
  Tho' springing from a soul that feels
Deep worship of those works divine
  Where Genius all his light reveals--
How weak 'tis to the words that came
From him, thy peer in art and fame,[2]
Whom I have known, by day, by night,
Hang o'er thy marble with delight;
And while his lingering hand would steal
  O'er every grace the taper's rays[3]
Give thee with all the generous zeal
Such master spirits only feel,
  That best of fame, a rival's prize!


[1] This statue is one of the last works of Canova, and was not yet in
marble when I left Rome. The other, which seems to prove, in contradiction
to very high authority, that expression of the intensest kind is fully
within the sphere of sculpture, was executed many years ago, and is in the
possession of the Count Somariva at Paris.

[2] Chantrey.

[3] Canova always shows his fine statue, the Venere Vincitrice, by the
light of a small candle.






EXTRACT XVI.

Les Charmettes.


_A Visit to the house where Rousseau lived with Madame de Warrens.--
Their Menage.--Its Grossness.--Claude Anet.--Reverence with which the spot
is now visited.--Absurdity of this blind Devotion to Fame.--Feelings
excited by the Beauty and Seclusion of the Scene. Disturbed by its
Associations with Rousseau's History.--Impostures of Men of Genius.--Their
Power of mimicking all the best Feelings, Love, Independence, etc_.


Strange power of Genius, that can throw
Round all that's vicious, weak, and low,
Such magic lights, such rainbows dyes
As dazzle even the steadiest eyes.

       *       *       *       *       *

'Tis worse than weak--'tis wrong, 'tis shame,
This mean prostration before Fame;
This casting down beneath the car
Of Idols, whatsoe'er they are,
Life's purest, holiest decencies,
To be careered o'er as they please.
No--give triumphant Genius all
For which his loftiest wish can call:
If he be worshipt, let it be
  For attributes, his noblest, first;
Not with that base idolatry
  Which sanctifies his last and worst.

  I may be cold;--may want that glow
Of high romance which bards should know;
That holy homage which is felt
In treading where the great have dwelt;
This reverence, whatsoe'er it be,
  I fear, I feel, I have it _not_:--
For here at this still hour, to me
  The charms of this delightful spot,
Its calm seclusion from the throng,
  From all the heart would fain forget,
This narrow valley and the song
  Of its small murmuring rivulet,
The flitting to and fro of birds,
Tranquil and tame as they were once
In Eden ere the startling words
  Of man disturbed their orisons,
Those little, shadowy paths that wind
Up the hillside, with fruit-trees lined
And lighted only by the breaks
The gay wind in the foliage makes,
Or vistas here and there that ope
  Thro' weeping willows, like the snatches
Of far-off scenes of light, which Hope
  Even tho' the shade of sadness catches!--
All this, which--could I once but lose
  The memory of those vulgar ties
Whose grossness all the heavenliest hues
  Of Genius can no more disguise
Than the sun's beams can do away
The filth of fens o'er which they play--
This scene which would have filled my heart
  With thoughts of all that happiest is;--
Of Love where self hath only part,
  As echoing back another's bliss;
Of solitude secure and sweet.
Beneath whose shade the Virtues meet.
Which while it shelters never chills
  Our sympathies with human woe,
But keeps them like sequestered rills
Purer and fresher in their flow;
Of happy days that share their beams
  'Twixt quiet mirth and wise employ;
Of tranquil nights that give in dreams
  The moonlight of the morning's joy!--
All this my heart could dwell on here,
But for those gross mementoes near;
Those sullying truths that cross the track
Of each sweet thought and drive them back
Full into all the mire and strife
And vanities of that man's life,
Who more than all that e'er have glowed
  With fancy's flame (and it was _his_,
In fullest warmth and radiance) showed
  What an impostor Genius is;
How with that strong, mimetic art
  Which forms its life and soul, it takes
All shapes of thought, all hues of heart,
  Nor feels itself one throb it wakes;
How like a gem its light may smile
  O'er the dark path by mortals trod,
Itself as mean a worm the while
  As crawls at midnight o'er the sod;
What gentle words and thoughts may fall
  From its false lip, what zeal to bless,
While home, friends, kindred, country, all,
  Lie waste beneath its selfishness;
How with the pencil hardly dry
  From coloring up such scenes of love
And beauty as make young hearts sigh
  And dream and think thro' heaven they rove,
They who can thus describe and move,
  The very workers of these charms,
Nor seek nor know a joy above
  Some Maman's or Theresa's arms!

How all in short that makes the boast
Of their false tongues they want the most;
And while with freedom on their lips,
  Sounding their timbrels, to set free
This bright world, laboring in the eclipse
  Of priestcraft and of slavery,--
They may themselves be slaves as low
  As ever Lord or Patron made
To blossom in his smile or grow
  Like stunted brushwood in his shade.
Out on the craft!--I'd rather be
  One of those hinds that round me tread,
With just enough of sense to see
  The noonday sun that's o'er his head,
Than thus with high-built genius curst,
  That hath no heart for its foundation,
Be all at once that's brightest, worst,
  Sublimest, meanest in creation!








CORRUPTION,

AND

INTOLERANCE.

TWO POEMS.

ADDRESSED TO AN ENGLISHMAN BY AN IRISHMAN.




PREFACE.


The practice which has been lately introduced into literature, of writing
very long notes upon very indifferent verses, appears to me a rather happy
invention, as it supplies us with a mode of turning dull poetry to
account; and as horses too heavy for the saddle may yet serve well enough
to draw lumber, so Poems of this kind make excellent beasts of burden and
will bear notes though they may not bear reading. Besides, the comments in
such cases are so little under the necessity of paying any servile
deference to the text, that they may even adopt that Socratic, "_quod
supra nos nihil ad nos."_

In the first of the two following Poems, I have ventured to speak of the
Revolution of 1688, in language which has sometimes been employed by Tory
writers and which is therefore neither very new nor popular. But however
an Englishman might be reproached with ingratitude for depreciating the
merits and results of a measure which he is taught to regard as the source
of his liberties--however ungrateful it might appear in Alderman Birch to
question for a moment the purity of that glorious era to which he is
indebted for the seasoning of so many orations--yet an Irishman who has
none of these obligations to acknowledge, to whose country the Revolution
brought nothing but injury and insult, and who recollects that the book of
Molyneux was burned by order of William's Whig Parliament for daring to
extend to unfortunate Ireland those principles on which the Revolution was
professedly founded--an Irishman _may_ be allowed to criticise freely the
measures of that period without exposing himself either to the imputation
of ingratitude or to the suspicion of being influenced by any Popish
remains of Jacobitism. No nation, it is true, was ever blessed with a more
golden opportunity of establishing and securing its liberties for ever
than the conjuncture of Eighty-eight presented to the people of Great
Britain. But the disgraceful reigns of Charles and James had weakened and
degraded the national character. The bold notions of popular right which
had arisen out of the struggles between Charles the First and his
Parliament were gradually supplanted by those slavish doctrines for which
Lord Hawkesbury eulogizes the churchmen of that period, and as the
Reformation had happened too soon for the purity of religion, so the
Revolution came too late for the spirit of liberty. Its advantages
accordingly were for the most part specious and transitory, while the
evils which it entailed are still felt and still increasing. By rendering
unnecessary the frequent exercise of Prerogative,--that unwieldy power
which cannot move a step without alarm,--it diminished the only
interference of the Crown, which is singly and independently exposed
before the people, and whose abuses therefore are obvious to their senses
and capabilities.  Like the myrtle over a celebrated statue in Minerva's
temple at Athens, it skilfully veiled from the public eye the only
obtrusive feature of royalty. At the same time, however, that the
Revolution abridged this unpopular attribute, it amply compensated by the
substitution of a new power, as much more potent in its effect as it is
more secret in its operations. In the disposal of an immense revenue and
the extensive patronage annexed to it, the first foundations of this power
of the Crown were laid; the innovation of a standing army at once
increased and strengthened it, and the few slight barriers which the Act
of Settlement opposed to its progress have all been gradually removed
during the Whiggish reigns that succeeded; till at length this spirit of
influence has become the vital principle of the state,--an agency, subtle
and unseen, which pervades every part of the Constitution, lurks under all
its forms and regulates all its movements, and, like the invisible sylph
or grace which presides over the motions of beauty,

  "_illam, quicquid agit, quoquo westigia flectit,
   componit furlim subsequiturque."_

The cause of Liberty and the Revolution are so habitually associated in
the minds of Englishmen that probably in objecting to the latter I may be
thought hostile or indifferent to the former. But assuredly nothing could
be more unjust than such a suspicion. The very object indeed which my
humble animadversions would attain is that in the crisis to which I think
England is now hastening, and between which and foreign subjugation she
may soon be compelled to choose, the errors and omissions of 1688 should
be remedied; and, as it was then her fate to experience a Revolution
without Reform, so she may now endeavor to accomplish a Reform without
Revolution.

In speaking of the parties which have so long agitated England, it will be
observed that I lean as little to the Whigs as to their adversaries. Both
factions have been equally cruel to Ireland and perhaps equally insincere
in their efforts for the liberties of England. There is one name indeed
connected with Whiggism, of which I can never think but with veneration
and tenderness. As justly, however, might the light of the sun be claimed
by any particular nation as the sanction of that name be monopolized by
any party whatsoever. Mr. Fox belonged to mankind and they have lost in
him their ablest friend.

With respect to the few lines upon Intolerance, which I have subjoined,
they are but the imperfect beginning of a long series of Essays with which
I here menace my readers upon the same important subject. I shall look to
no higher merit in the task than that of giving a new form to claims and
remonstrances which have often been much more eloquently urged and which
would long ere now have produced their effect, but that the minds of some
of our statesmen, like the pupil of the human eye, contract themselves the
more, the stronger light is shed upon them.






CORRUPTION,

AN EPISTLE.


Boast on, my friend--tho' stript of all beside,
Thy struggling nation still retains her pride:
That pride which once in genuine glory woke
When Marlborough fought and brilliant St. John spoke;
That pride which still, by time and shame unstung,
Outlives even Whitelocke's sword and Hawkesbury's tongue!
Boast on, my friend, while in this humbled isle[1]
Where Honor mourns and Freedom fears to smile,
Where the bright light of England's fame is known
But by the shadow o'er our fortunes thrown;
Where, doomed ourselves to naught but wrongs and slights,[2]
We hear you boast of Britain's glorious rights,
As wretched slaves that under hatches lie
Hear those on deck extol the sun and sky!
Boast on, while wandering thro' my native haunts,
I coldly listen to thy patriot vaunts;
And feel, tho' close our wedded countries twine,
More sorrow for my own than pride from thine.

  Yet pause a moment--and if truths severe
Can find an inlet to that courtly ear,
Which hears no news but Ward's gazetted lies,
And loves no politics in rhyme but Pye's,--
If aught can please thee but the good old saws
Of "Church and State," and "William's matchless laws,"
And "Acts and Rights of glorious Eighty-eight,"--
Things which tho' now a century out of date
Still serve to ballast with convenient words,
A few crank arguments for speeching lords,--
Turn while I tell how England's freedom found,
Where most she lookt for life, her deadliest wound;
How brave she struggled while her foe was seen,
How faint since Influence lent that foe a screen;
How strong o'er James and Popery she prevailed,
How weakly fell when Whigs and gold assailed.

  While kings were poor and all those schemes unknown
Which drain the people to enrich the throne;
Ere yet a yielding Commons had supplied
Those chains of gold by which themselves are tied,
Then proud Prerogative, untaught to creep
With bribery's silent foot on Freedom's sleep,
Frankly avowed his bold enslaving plan
And claimed a right from God to trample man!
But Luther's schism had too much roused mankind
For Hampden's truths to linger long behind;
Nor then, when king-like popes had fallen so low,
Could pope-like kings escape the levelling blow.[3]
That ponderous sceptre (in whose place we bow
To the light talisman of influence now),
Too gross, too visible to work the spell
Which modern power performs, in fragments fell:
In fragments lay, till, patched and painted o'er
With fleurs-de-lis, it shone and scourged once more.

  'Twas then, my friend, thy kneeling nation quaft
Long, long and deep, the churchman's opiate draught
Of passive, prone obedience--then took flight
All sense of man's true dignity and right;
And Britons slept so sluggish in their chain
That Freedom's watch-voice called almost in vain.
Oh England! England! what a chance was thine,
When the last tyrant of that ill-starred line
Fled from his sullied crown and left thee free
To found thy own eternal liberty!
How nobly high in that propitious hour
Might patriot hands have raised the triple tower[4]
Of British freedom on a rock divine
Which neither force could storm nor treachery mine!
But no--the luminous, the lofty plan,
Like mighty Babel, seemed too bold for man;
The curse of jarring tongues again was given
To thwart a work which raised men nearer heaven.
While Tories marred what Whigs had scarce begun,
While Whigs undid what Whigs themselves had done.
The hour was lost and William with a smile
Saw Freedom weeping o'er the unfinisht pile!

  Hence all the ills you suffer,--hence remain
Such galling fragments of that feudal chain[5]
Whose links, around you by the Norman flung,
Tho' loosed and broke so often, still have clung.
Hence sly Prerogative like Jove of old
Has turned his thunder into showers of gold,
Whose silent courtship wins securer joys,
Taints by degrees, and ruins without noise.
While parliaments, no more those sacred things
Which make and rule the destiny of kings.
Like loaded dice by ministers are thrown,
And each new set of sharpers cog their own.
Hence the rich oil that from the Treasury steals
Drips smooth o'er all the Constitution's wheels,
Giving the old machine such pliant play[6]
That Court and Commons jog one joltless way,
While Wisdom trembles for the crazy car,
So gilt, so rotten, carrying fools so far;
And the duped people, hourly doomed to pay
The sums that bribe their liberties away,[7]--
Like a young eagle who has lent his plume
To fledge the shaft by which he meets his doom,--
See their own feathers pluckt, to wing the dart
Which rank corruption destines for their heart!
But soft! methinks I hear thee proudly say,
"What! shall I listen to the impious lay
"That dares with Tory license to profane
"The bright bequests of William's glorious reign?
"Shall the great wisdom of our patriot sires,
"Whom Hawkesbury quotes and savory Birch admires,
"Be slandered thus? shall honest Steele agree
"With virtuous Rose to call us pure and free,
"Yet fail to prove it? Shall our patent pair
"Of wise state-poets waste their words in air,
"And Pye unheeded breathe his prosperous strain,
"And Canning _take the people's sense_ in vain?"

  The people!--ah! that Freedom's form should stay
Where Freedom's spirit long hath past away!
That a false smile should play around the dead
And flush the features when the soul hath fled![8]
When Rome had lost her virtue with her rights,
When her foul tyrant sat on Capreae's heights,[9]
Amid his ruffian spies and doomed to death
Each noble name they blasted with their breath,--
Even then, (in mockery of that golden time,
When the Republic rose revered, sublime,
And her proud sons, diffused from zone to zone,
Gave kings to every nation but their own,)
Even then the senate and the tribunes stood,
Insulting marks, to show how high the flood
Of Freedom flowed, in glory's bygone day,
And how it ebbed,--for ever ebbed away![10]

  Look but around--tho' yet a tyrant's sword
Nor haunts our sleep nor glitters o'er our board,
Tho' blood be better drawn, by modern quacks,
With Treasury leeches than with sword or axe;
Yet say, could even a prostrate tribune's power
Or a mock senate in Rome's servile hour
Insult so much the claims, the rights of man,
As doth that fettered mob, that free divan,
Of noble tools and honorable knaves,
Of pensioned patriots and privileged slaves;--
That party-colored mass which naught can warm
But rank corruption's heat--whose quickened swarm
Spread their light wings in Bribery's golden sky,
Buzz for a period, lay their eggs and die;--
That greedy vampire which from Freedom's tomb
Comes forth with all the mimicry of bloom
Upon its lifeless cheek and sucks and drains
A people's blood to feel its putrid veins!

  Thou start'st, my friend, at picture drawn so dark--
"Is there no light?"--thou ask'st--"no lingering spark
"Of ancient fire to warm us? Lives there none,
"To act a Marvell's part?"[11]--alas! not one.
_To_ place and power all public spirit tends,
_In_ place and power all public spirit ends;
Like hardy plants that love the air and sky,
When _out_, 'twill thrive--but taken _in_, 'twill die!

  Not bolder truths of sacred Freedom hung
From Sidney's pen or burned on Fox's tongue,
Than upstart Whigs produce each market-night,
While yet their conscience, as their purse, is light;
While debts at home excite their care for those
Which, dire to tell, their much-loved country owes,
And loud and upright, till their prize be known,
They thwart the King's supplies to raise their own.
But bees on flowers alighting cease their hum--
So, settling upon places, Whigs grow dumb.
And, tho' most base is he who, 'neath the shade
Of Freedom's ensign plies corruption's trade,
And makes the sacred flag he dares to show
His passport to the market of her foe,
Yet, yet, I own, so venerably dear
Are Freedom's grave old anthems to my ear,
That I enjoy them, tho' by traitors sung,
And reverence Scripture even from Satan's tongue.
Nay, when the constitution has expired,
I'll have such men, like Irish wakers, hired
To chant old "_Habeas Corpus_" by its side,
And ask in purchased ditties why it died?

See yon smooth lord whom nature's plastic pains
Would seem to've fashioned for those Eastern reigns
When eunuchs flourisht, and such nerveless things
As men rejected were the chosen of kings;--[12]
Even _he_, forsooth, (oh fraud, of all the worst!)
Dared to assume the patriot's name at first--
Thus Pitt began, and thus begin his apes;
Thus devils when _first_ raised take pleasing shapes.
But oh, poor Ireland! if revenge be sweet
For centuries of wrong, for dark deceit
And withering insult--for the Union thrown
Into thy bitter cup when that alone
Of slavery's draught was wanting[13]--if for this
Revenge be sweet, thou _hast_ that daemon's bliss;
For sure 'tis more than hell's revenge to fee
That England trusts the men who've ruined thee:--
That in these awful days when every hour
Creates some new or blasts some ancient power,
When proud Napoleon like the enchanted shield
Whose light compelled each wondering foe to yield,
With baleful lustre blinds the brave and free
And dazzles Europe into slavery,--
That in this hour when patriot zeal should guide,
When Mind should rule and--Fox should _not_ have died,
All that devoted England can oppose
To enemies made fiends and friends made foes,
Is the rank refuse, the despised remains
Of that unpitying power, whose whips and chains
Drove Ireland first to turn with harlot glance
Towards other shores and woo the embrace of France;--
Those hacked and tainted tools, so foully fit
For the grand artisan of mischief, Pitt,
So useless ever but in vile employ,
So weak to save, so vigorous to destroy--
Such are the men that guard thy threatened shore,
Oh England! sinking England! boast no more.


[1] England began very early to feel the effects of cruelty towards her
dependencies. "The severity of her government [says Macpherson]
contributed more to deprive her of the continental dominions of the family
of the Plantagenet than the arms of France."--See his _History_, vol.
i.

[2] "By the total reduction of the kingdom of Ireland in 1691[says
Burke], the ruin of the native Irish, and in a great measure, too, of the
first races of the English, was completely accomplished. The new English
interested was settled with as solid a stability as anything in human
affairs can look for. All the penal laws of that unparalleled code of
oppression, which were made after the last event, were manifestly the
effects of national hatred and scorn towards a conquered people, whom the
victors delighted to trample upon, and were not at all afraid to provoke."
Yet this is the era to which the wise Common Council of Dublin refer us
for "invaluable blessings," etc.

[3] The drivelling correspondence between James I and his "dog Steenie"
(the Duke of Buckingham), which we find among the Hardwicke Papers,
sufficiently shows, if we wanted any such illustration, into what doting,
idiotic brains the plan at arbitrary power may enter.

[4] Tacitus has expressed his opinion, in a passage very frequently
quoted, that such a distribution of power as the theory of the British
constitution exhibits is merely a subject of bright speculation, "a system
more easily praised than practised, and which, even could it happen to
exist, would certainly not prove permanent;" and, in truth, a review of
England's annals would dispose us to agree with the great historian's
remark. For we find that at no period whatever has this balance of the
three estates existed; that the nobles predominated till the policy of
Henry VII, and his successor reduced their weight by breaking up the
feudal system of property; that the power of the Crown became then supreme
and absolute, till the bold encroachments of the Commons subverted the
fabric altogether; that the alternate ascendency of prerogative and
privilege distracted the period which followed the Restoration; and that
lastly, the Acts of 1688, by laying the foundation of an unbounded court-
influence, have secured a preponderance to the Throne, which every
succeeding year increases. So that the vaunted British constitution has
never perhaps existed but in mere theory.

[5] The last great wound given to the feudal system was the Act of the
12th of Charles II, which abolished the tenure of knight's service _in
capite_, and which Blackstone compares, for its salutary influence upon
property, to the boasted provisions of Magna Charta itself. Yet even in
this act we see the effects of that counteracting spirit which has
contrived to weaken every effort of the English nation towards liberty.

[6] "They drove so fast [says Wellwood of the ministers of Charles I.],
that it was no wonder that the wheels and chariot broke."--(_Memoirs_
p. 86.)

[7] Among those auxiliaries which the Revolution of 1688 marshalled on the
side of the Throne, the bugbear of Popery has not been the least
convenient and serviceable. Those unskilful tyrants, Charles and James,
instead of profiting by that useful subserviency which has always
distinguished the ministers of our religious establishment, were so
infatuated as to plan the ruin of this best bulwark of their power and
moreover connected their designs upon the Church so undisguisedly with
their attacks upon the Constitution that they identified in the minds of
the people the interests of their religion and their liberties. During
those times therefore "No Popery" was the watchword of freedom and served
to keep the public spirit awake against the invasions of bigotry and
prerogative.

[8] "It is a scandal [said Sir Charles Sedley in William's reign] that a
government so sick at heart as ours is should look so well in the face."

[9] The senate still continued, during the reign of Tiberius, to manage
all the business of the public: the money was then and long after coined
by their authority, and every other public affair received their sanction.

[10] There is something very touching in what Tacitus tells us of the
hopes that revived in a few patriot bosoms, when the death of Augustus was
near approaching, and the fond expectation with which they already began
"_bona libertatis incassum disserere_."

[11] Andrew Marvell, the honest opposer of the court during the reign of
Charles the Second, and the last member of parliament who, according to
the ancient mode, took wages from his constituents. The Commons have,
since then, much changed their pay-masters.

[12] According to Xenophon, the chief circumstance which recommended these
creatures to the service of Eastern princes was the ignominious station
they held in society, and the probability of their being, upon this
account, more devoted to the will and caprice of a master, from whose
notice alone they derived consideration, and in whose favor they might
seek refuge from the general contempt of mankind.

[13] Among the many measures, which, since the Revolution, have
contributed to increase the influence of the Throne, and to feed up this
"Aaron's serpent" of the constitution to its present healthy and
respectable magnitude, there have been few more nutritive than the Scotch
and Irish Unions.






INTOLERANCE,

A SATIRE.


    "This clamor which pretends to be raised for the safety of religion
    has almost worn put the very appearance of it, and rendered us not
    only the most divided but the most immoral people upon the face of the
    earth."

    ADDISON, _Freeholder_, No. 37.


Start not, my friend, nor think the Muse will stain
Her classic fingers with the dust profane
Of Bulls, Decrees and all those thundering scrolls
Which took such freedom once with royal souls,[1]
When heaven was yet the pope's exclusive trade,
And kings were _damned_ as fast as now they're _made_,
No, no--let Duigenan search the papal chair
For fragrant treasures long forgotten there;
And, as the witch of sunless Lapland thinks
That little swarthy gnomes delight in stinks,
Let sallow Perceval snuff up the gale
Which wizard Duigenan's gathered sweets exhale.
Enough for me whose heart has learned to scorn
Bigots alike in Rome or England born,
Who loathe the venom whence-soe'er it springs,
From popes or lawyers,[2] pastrycooks or kings,--
Enough for me to laugh and weep by turns,
As mirth provokes or indignation burns,
As Canning Vapors or as France succeeds,
As Hawkesbury proses, or as Ireland bleeds!

  And thou, my friend, if, in these headlong days,
When bigot Zeal her drunken antics plays
So near a precipice, that men the while
Look breathless on and shudder while they smile--
If in such fearful days thou'lt dare to look
To hapless Ireland, to this rankling nook
Which Heaven hath freed from poisonous things in vain,
While Gifford's tongue and Musgrave's pen remain--
If thou hast yet no golden blinkers got
To shade thine eyes from this devoted spot,
Whose wrongs tho' blazoned o'er the world they be,
Placemen alone are privileged _not_ to see--
Oh! turn awhile, and tho' the shamrock wreathes
My homely harp, yet shall the song it breathes
Of Ireland's slavery and of Ireland's woes
Live when the memory of her tyrant foes
Shall but exist, all future knaves to warn,
Embalmed in hate and canonized by scorn.
When Castlereagh in sleep still more profound
Than his own opiate tongue now deals around,
Shall wait the impeachment of that awful day
Which even _his_ practised hand can't bribe away.

  Yes, my dear friend, wert thou but near me now,
To see how Spring lights up on Erin's brow
Smiles that shine out unconquerably fair
Even thro' the blood-marks left by Camden there,--[3]
Couldst thou but see what verdure paints the sod
Which none but tyrants and their slaves have trod,
And didst thou know the spirit, kind and brave,
That warms the soul of each insulted slave,
Who tired with struggling sinks beneath his lot
And seems by all but watchful France forgot--[4]
Thy heart would burn--yes, even thy Pittite heart
Would burn to think that such a blooming part
Of the world's garden, rich in nature's charms
And filled with social souls and vigorous arms,
Should be the victim of that canting crew,
So smooth, so godly,--yet so devilish too;
Who, armed at once with prayer-books and with whips,
Blood on their hands and Scripture on their lips,
Tyrants by creed and tortures by text,
Make _this_ life hell in honor of the _next_!
Your Redesdales, Percevals,--great, glorious Heaven,
If I'm presumptuous, be my tongue forgiven,
When here I swear by my soul's hope of rest,
I'd rather have been born ere man was blest
With the pure dawn of Revelation's light,
Yes,--rather plunge me back in Pagan night,
And take my chance with Socrates for bliss,[5]
Than be the Christian of a faith like this,
Which builds on heavenly cant its earthly sway
And in a convert mourns to lose a prey;
Which, grasping human hearts with double hold,--
Like Dane's lover mixing god and gold,[6]--
Corrupts both state and church and makes an oath
The knave and atheist's passport into both;
Which, while it dooms dissenting souls to know
Nor bliss above nor liberty below,
Adds the slave's suffering to the sinner's fear,
And lest he 'scape hereafter racks him here!
But no--far other faith, far milder beams
Of heavenly justice warm the Christian's dreams;
_His_ creed is writ on Mercy's page above,
By the pure hands of all-atoning Love;
_He_ weeps to see abused Religion twine
Round Tyranny's coarse brow her wreath divine;
And _he_, while round him sects and nations raise
To the one God their varying notes of praise,
Blesses each voice, whate'er its tone may be,
That serves to swell the general harmony.[7]

  Such was the spirit, gently, grandly bright,
That filled, oh Fox! thy peaceful soul with light;
While free and spacious as that ambient air
Which folds our planet in its circling care,
The mighty sphere of thy transparent mind
Embraced the world, and breathed for all mankind.
Last of the great, farewell!--yet _not_ the last--
Tho' Britain's sunshine hour with thee be past,
Ierne still one ray of glory gives
And feels but half thy loss while Grattan lives.


[1] The king-deposing doctrine, notwithstanding its many mischievous
absurdities, was of no little service to the cause of political liberty,
by inculcating the right of resistance to tyrants and asserting the will
of the people to be the only true fountain of power.

[2] When Innocent X. was entreated to decide the controversy between the
Jesuits and the Jansenists, he answered, that "he had been bred a lawyer,
and had therefore nothing to do with divinity." It were to be wished that
some of our English pettifoggers knew their own fit element as well as
Pope Innocent X.

[3] Not the Camden who speaks thus of Ireland:--"To wind up all, whether
we regard the fruitfulness of the soil, the advantage of the sea, with so
many commodious havens, or the natives themselves, who are warlike,
ingenious, handsome, and well-complexioned, soft-skinned and very nimble,
by reason of the pliantness of their muscles, this Island is in many
respects so happy, that Giraldus might very well say, 'Nature had regarded
with more favorable eyes than ordinary this Kingdom of Zephyr.'"

[4] The example of toleration, which Bonaparte has held forth, will, I
fear, produce no other effect than that of determining the British
government to persist, from the very spirit of opposition, in their own
old system of intolerance and injustice: just as the Siamese blacken their
teeth, "because," as they say, "the devil has white ones."

[5] In a singular work, written by one Franciscus Collius, "upon the Souls
of the Pagans," the author discusses, with much coolness and erudition,
all the probable chances of salvation upon which a heathen philosopher
might calculate. Consigning to perdition without much difficulty Plato,
Socrates, etc., the only sage at whose fate he seems to hesitate is
Pythagoras, in consideration of his golden thigh, and the many miracles
which he performed. But having balanced a little his claims and finding
reason to father all these miracles on the devil, he at length, in the
twenty-fifth chapter, decides upon damning him also.

[6] Mr. Fox, in his Speech on the Repeal of the Test Act (1790), thus
condemns the intermixture of religion with the political constitution of a
state:--"What purpose [he asks] can it serve, except the baleful purpose
of communicating and receiving contamination? Under such an alliance
corruption must alight upon the one, and slavery overwhelm the other."

[7] Both Bayle and Locke would have treated the subject of Toleration in a
manner much more worthy of themselves and of the cause if they had written
in an age less distracted by religious prejudices.








THE SCEPTIC,

A PHILOSOPHICAL SATIRE.




PREFACE.


The Sceptical Philosophy of the Ancients has been no less misrepresented
than the Epicurean. Pyrrho may perhaps have carried it to rather an
irrational excess;--but we must not believe with Beattie all the
absurdities imputed to this philosopher; and it appears to me that the
doctrines of the school, as explained by Sextus Empiricus, are far more
suited to the wants and infirmities of human reason as well as more
conducive to the mild virtues of humility and patience, than any of those
systems of philosophy which preceded the introduction of Christianity. The
Sceptics may be said to have held a middle path between the Dogmatists and
Academicians; the former of whom boasted that they had attained the truth
while the latter denied that any attainable truth existed. The Sceptics
however, without either asserting or denying its existence, professed to
be modestly and anxiously in search of it; or, as St. Augustine expresses
it, in his liberal tract against the Manichaeans, "_nemo nostrum dicat jam
se invenisse veritatem; sic eam quoeramus quasi ab utrisque nesciatur_."
From this habit of impartial investigation and the necessity which it
imposed upon them of studying not only every system of philosophy but
every art and science which professed to lay its basis in truth, they
necessarily took a wider range of erudition and were far more travelled in
the regions of philosophy than those whom conviction or bigotry had
domesticated in any particular system. It required all the learning of
dogmatism to overthrow the dogmatism of learning; and the Sceptics may be
said to resemble in this respect that ancient incendiary who stole from
the altar the fire with which he destroyed the temple. This advantage over
all the other sects is allowed to them even by Lipsius, whose treatise on
the miracles of the Virgo Hallensis will sufficiently save him from all
suspicion of scepticism. "_labore, ingenio, memoria_," he says, "_supra
omnes pene philosophos fuisse.--quid nonne omnia aliorum secta tenere
debuerunt et inquirere, si poterunt refellere?  res dicit nonne orationes
varias, raras, subtiles inveniri ad tam receptas, claras, certas (ut
videbatur) sententias evertendas?" etc.--"Manuduct. ad Philosoph. Stoic."
Dissert_. 4.

Between the scepticism of the ancients and the moderns the great
difference is that the former doubted for the purpose of investigating, as
may be exemplified by the third book of Aristotle's Metaphysics, while the
latter investigate for the purpose of doubting, as may be seen through
most of the philosophical works of Hume. Indeed the Pyrrhonism of latter
days is not only more subtle than that of antiquity, but, it must be
confessed, more dangerous in its tendency. The happiness of a Christian
depends so essentially upon his belief, that it is but natural he should
feel alarm at the progress of doubt, lest it should steal by degrees into
that region from which he is most interested in excluding it, and poison
at last the very spring of his consolation and hope. Still however the
abuses of doubting ought not to deter a philosophical mind from indulging
mildly and rationally in its use; and there is nothing surely more
consistent with the meek spirit of Christianity than that humble
scepticism which professes not to extend its distrust beyond the circle of
human pursuits and the pretensions of human knowledge. A follower of this
school may be among the readiest to admit the claims of a superintending
Intelligence upon his faith and adoration: it is only to the wisdom of
this weak world that he refuses or at least delays his assent;--it is only
in passing through the shadow of earth that his mind undergoes the eclipse
of scepticism. No follower of Pyrrho has ever spoken more strongly against
the dogmatists than St. Paul himself, in the First Epistle to the
Corinthians; and there are passages in Ecclesiastes and other parts of
Scripture, which justify our utmost diffidence in all that human reason
originates. Even the Sceptics of antiquity refrained carefully from the
mysteries of theology, and in entering the temples of religion laid aside
their philosophy at the porch. Sextus Empiricus declares the acquiescence
of his sect in the general belief of a divine and foreknowing Power:--In
short it appears to me that this rational and well-regulated scepticism is
the only daughter of the Schools that can safely be selected as a handmaid
for Piety. He who distrusts the light of reason will be the first to
follow a more luminous guide; and if with an ardent love for truth he has
sought her in vain through the ways of this life, he will but turn with
the more hope to that better world where all is simple, true and
everlasting: for there is no parallax at the zenith;--it is only near our
troubled horizon that objects deceive us into vague and erroneous
calculations.






THE SCEPTIC


As the gay tint that decks the vernal rose[1]
Not in the flower but in our vision glows;
As the ripe flavor of Falernian tides
Not in the wine but in our taste resides;
So when with heartfelt tribute we declare
That Marco's honest and that Susan's fair,
'Tis in our minds and not in Susan's eyes
Or Marco's life the worth or beauty lies:
For she in flat-nosed China would appear
As plain a thing as Lady Anne is here;
And one light joke at rich Loretto's dome
Would rank good Marco with the damned at Rome.

  There's no deformity so vile, so base,
That 'tis not somewhere thought a charm, a grace;
No foul reproach that may not steal a beam
From other suns to bleach it to esteem.
Ask who is wise?--you'll find the self-same man
A sage in France, a madman in Japan;
And _here_ some head beneath a mitre swells,
Which _there_ had tingled to a cap and bells:
Nay, there may yet some monstrous region be,
Unknown to Cook and from Napoleon free,
Where Castlereagh would for a patriot pass
And mouthing Musgrave scarce be deemed an ass!

  "List not to reason (Epicurus cries),
"But trust the senses, _there_ conviction lies:"[2]--
Alas! _they_ judge not by a purer light,
Nor keep their fountains more untinged and bright:
Habit so mars them that the Russian swain
Will sigh for train-oil while he sips Champagne;
And health so rules them, that a fever's heat
Would make even Sheridan think water sweet.

  Just as the mind the erring sense[3] believes,
The erring mind in turn the sense deceives;
And cold disgust can find but wrinkles there,
Where passion fancies all that's smooth and fair.
P * * * *, who sees, upon his pillow laid,
A face for which ten thousand pounds were paid,
Can tell how quick before a jury flies
The spell that mockt the warm seducer's eyes.

  Self is the medium thro' which Judgment's ray
Can seldom pass without being turned astray.
The smith of Ephesus[4] thought Dian's shrine,
By which his craft most throve, the most divine;
And even the _true_ faith seems not half so true,
When linkt with _one_ good living as with _two_.
Had Wolcot first been pensioned by the throne,
Kings would have suffered by his praise alone;
And Paine perhaps, for something snug _per ann_.,
Had laught like Wellesley at all Rights of Man.

  But 'tis not only individual minds,--
Whole nations too the same delusion blinds.
Thus England, hot from Denmark's smoking meads,
Turns up her eyes at Gallia's guilty deeds;
Thus, self-pleased still, the same dishonoring chain
She binds in Ireland she would break in Spain;
While praised at distance, but at home forbid,
Rebels in Cork are patriots at Madrid.

  If Grotius be thy guide, shut, shut the book,--
In force alone for Laws of Nations look.
Let shipless Danes and whining Yankees dwell
On naval rights, with Grotius and Vattel.
While Cobbet's pirate code alone appears
Sound moral sense to England and Algiers.

  Woe to the Sceptic in these party days
Who wafts to neither shrine his puffs of praise!
For him no pension pours its annual fruits,
No fertile sinecure spontaneous shoots;
Not _his_ the meed that crowned Don Hookham's rhyme,
Nor sees he e'er in dreams of future time
Those shadowy forms of sleek reversions rise,
So dear to Scotchmen's second-sighted eyes.
Yet who that looks to History's damning leaf,
Where Whig and Tory, thief opposed to thief,
On either side in lofty shame are seen,[5]
While Freedom's form lies crucified between--
Who, Burdett, who such rival rogues can see,
But flies from _both_ to Honesty and thee?

  If weary of the world's bewildering maze,[6]
Hopeless of finding thro' its weedy ways
One flower of truth, the busy crowd we shun,
And to the shades of tranquil learning run,
How many a doubt pursues! how oft we sigh
When histories charm to think that histories lie!
That all are grave romances, at the best,
And Musgrave's but more clumsy than the rest.
By Tory Hume's seductive page beguiled,
We fancy Charles was just and Strafford mild;[7]
And Fox himself with party pencil draws
Monmouth a hero, "for the good old cause!"

Then rights are wrongs and victories are defeats,
As French or English pride the tale repeats;
And when they tell Corunna's story o'er,
They'll disagree in all but honoring Moore:
Nay, future pens to flatter future courts
May cite perhaps the Park-guns' gay reports,
To prove that England triumphs on the morn
Which found her Junot's jest and Europe's scorn.

  In science too--how many a system, raised
Like Neva's icy domes, awhile hath blazed
With lights of fancy and with forms of pride,
Then, melting, mingled with the oblivious tide!
_Now_ Earth usurps the centre of the sky,
_Now_ Newton puts the paltry planet by;
_Now_ whims revive beneath Descartes's[8] pen,
Which _now_, assailed by Locke's, expire again.
And when perhaps in pride of chemic powers,
We think the keys of Nature's kingdom ours,
Some Davy's magic touch the dream unsettles,
And turns at once our alkalis to metals.
Or should we roam in metaphysic maze
Thro' fair-built theories of former days,
Some Drummond from the north, more ably skilled,
Like other Goths, to ruin than to build,
Tramples triumphant thro' our fanes o'erthrown,
Nor leaves one grace, one glory of its own.

  Oh! Learning, whatsoe'er thy pomp and boast,
_Un_lettered minds have taught and charmed men most.
The rude, unread Columbus was our guide
To worlds, which learned Lactantius had denied;
And one wild Shakespeare following Nature's lights
Is worth whole planets filled with Stagyrites.

  See grave Theology, when once she strays
From Revelation's path, what tricks she plays;
What various heavens,--all fit for bards to sing,--
Have churchmen dreamed, from Papias,[9] down to King![10]
While hell itself, in India naught but smoke[11]
In Spain's a furnace and in France--a joke.

  Hail! modest Ignorance, thou goal and prize,
Thou last, best knowledge of the simply wise!
Hail! humble Doubt, when error's waves are past,
How sweet to reach thy sheltered port at last,
And there by changing skies nor lured nor awed.
Smile at the battling winds that roar abroad.
_There_ gentle Charity who knows how frail
The bark of Virtue, even in summer's gale,
Sits by the nightly fire whose beacon glows
For all who wander, whether friends or foes.
_There_ Faith retires and keeps her white sail furled,
Till called to spread it for a better world;
While Patience watching on the weedy shore,
And mutely waiting till the storm be o'er,
Oft turns to Hope who still directs her eye
To some blue spot just breaking in the sky!

  Such are the mild, the blest associates given
To him who doubts,--and trusts in naught but Heaven!


[1] "The particular bulk, number, figure, and motion of the parts of fire
or snow are really in them, whether any one perceives them or not, and
therefore they may be called real qualities because they really exist in
those bodies; but light, heat, whiteness or coldness are no more really in
them than sickness or pain is in manna. Take away the sensation of them;
let not the eye see light or colors, nor the ears hear sounds; let the
palate not taste nor the nose smell, and all colors, tastes, odors and
sounds, as they are such particular ideas, vanish and
cease."--_Locke_, book ii. chap 8.

[2] This was the creed also of those modern Epicureans, whom Ninon de
l'Enclos collected around her in the Rue des Tournelles, and whose object
seems to have been to decry the faculty of reason, as tending only to
embarrass our wholesome use of pleasures, without enabling us, in any
degree, to avoid their abuse. Madame des Houlires, the fair pupil of Des
Barreaux in the arts of poetry and gallantry, has devoted most of her
verses to this laudable purpose, and is even such a determined foe to
reason, that, in one of her pastorals, she congratulates her sheep on the
want of it.

[3] Socrates and Plato were the grand sources of ancient scepticism.
According to Cicero ("_de Orator_," lib. iii.), they supplied Arcesilas
with the doctrines of the Middle Academy; and how closely these resembled
the tenets of the Sceptics, may be seen even in Sextus Empiricus (lib. i.
cap. 33), who with all his distinctions can scarcely prove any difference.
It appears strange that Epicurus should have been a dogmatist; and his
natural temper would most probably have led him to the repose of
scepticism had not the Stoics by their violent opposition to his doctrines
compelled him to be as obstinate as themselves.

[4] _Acts_, chap. xix. "For a certain man named Demetrius, a silversmith,
which made silver shrines for Diana, brought no small gain unto the
craftsmen."

[5] "Those two thieves," says Ralph, between whom the nation is
crucified."--"_Use and Abuse of Parliaments_."

[6] The agitation of the ship is one of the chief difficulties which
impede the discovery of the longitude at sea; and the tumult and hurry of
life are equally unfavorable to that calm level of mind which is necessary
to an inquirer after truth.

[7] He defends Stafford's conduct as "innocent and even laudable." In the
same spirit, speaking of the arbitary sentences of the Star Chamber, he
says,--"The severity of the Star Chamber, which was generally ascribed to
Laud's passionate disposition, was perhaps in itself somewhat blamable."

[8] Descartes, who is considered as the parent of modern scepticism, says,
that there is nothing in the whole range of philosophy which does not
admit of two opposite opinions, and which is not involved in doubt and
uncertainty. Gassendi is likewise to be added to the list of modern
Sceptics, and Wedderkopff, has denounced Erasmus also as a follower of
Pyrrho, for his opinions upon the Trinity, and some other subjects. To
these if we add the names of Bayle, Malebranche, Dryden, Locke, etc., I
think there is no one who need be ashamed of insulting in such company.

[9] Papias lived about the time of the apostles, and is supposed to have
given birth to the heresy of the Chiliastae, whose heaven was by no means
of a spiritual nature, but rather an anticipation of the Prophet of Hera's
elysium.

[10] King, in his "Morsels of Criticisms," vol. i., supposes the sun to be
the receptacle of blessed spirits.

[11] The Indians call hell "the House of Smoke."








TWOPENNY POST-BAG,

BY

THOMAS BROWN, THE YOUNGER.


    _elapsae manibus secidere tabellae_.--OVID.




DEDICATION.

TO

STEPHEN WOOLRICHE, ESQ.


MY DEAR WOOLRICHE,--

It is now about seven years since I promised (and I grieve to think it is
almost as long since we met) to dedicate to you the very first Book, of
whatever size or kind I should publish. Who could have thought that so
many years would elapse, without my giving the least signs of life upon
the subject of this important promise? Who could have imagined that a
volume of doggerel, after all, would be the first offering that Gratitude
would lay upon the shrine of Friendship?

If you continue, however, to be as much interested about me and my
pursuits as formerly, you will be happy to hear that doggerel is not my
_only_ occupation; but that I am preparing to throw my name to the Swans
of the Temple of Immortality, leaving it of course to the said Swans to
determine whether they ever will take the trouble of picking it from the
stream.

In the meantime, my dear Woolriche, like an orthodox Lutheran, you must
judge of me rather by my _faith_ than my _works_; and however trifling the
tribute which I here offer, never doubt the fidelity with which I am and
always shall be

Your sincere and attached friend,

THE AUTHOR.

_March 4, 1813_.




PREFACE.


The Bag, from which the following Letters are selected, was dropped by a
Twopenny Postman about two months since, and picked up by an emissary of
the Society for the Suppression of Vice, who supposing it might materially
assist the private researches of that Institution, immediately took it to
his employers and was rewarded handsomely for his trouble. Such a treasury
of secrets was worth a whole host of informers; and, accordingly, like the
Cupids of the poet (if I may use so profane a simile) who "fell at odds
about the sweet-bag of a bee,"[1] those venerable Suppressors almost
fought with each other for the honor and delight of first ransacking the
Post-Bag. Unluckily, however, it turned out upon examination that the
discoveries of profligacy which it enabled them to make, lay chiefly in
those upper regions of society which their well-bred regulations forbid
them to molest or meddle with.--In consequence they gained but very few
victims by their prize, and after lying for a week or two under Mr.
Hatchard's counter the Bag with its violated contents was sold for a
trifle to a friend of mine.

It happened that I had been just then seized with an ambition (having
never tried the strength of my wing but in a Newspaper) to publish
something or other in the shape of a Book; and it occurred to me that, the
present being such a letter-writing era, a few of these Twopenny-Post
Epistles turned into easy verse would be as light and popular a task as I
could possibly select for a commencement. I did not, however, think it
prudent to give too many Letters at first and accordingly have been
obliged (in order to eke out a sufficient number of pages) to reprint some
of those trifles, which had already appeared in the public journals. As in
the battles of ancient times, the shades of the departed were sometimes
seen among the combatants, so I thought I might manage to remedy the
thinness of my ranks, by conjuring up a few dead and forgotten ephemerons
to fill them.

Such are the motives and accidents that led to the present publication;
and as this is the first time my Muse has ever ventured out of the go-cart
of a Newspaper, though I feel all a parent's delight at seeing little Miss
go alone, I am also not without a parent's anxiety lest an unlucky fall
should be the consequence of the experiment; and I need not point out how
many living instances might be found of Muses that have suffered very
severely in their heads from taking rather too early and rashly to their
feet. Besides, a Book is so very different a thing from a Newspaper!--in
the former, your doggerel without either company or shelter must stand
shivering in the middle of a bleak page by itself; whereas in the latter
it is comfortably backed by advertisements and has sometimes even a Speech
of Mr. Stephen's, or something equally warm, for a _chauffe-pieds_--so
that, in general, the very reverse of "_laudatur et alget_" is its
destiny.

Ambition, however, must run some risks and I shall be very well satisfied
if the reception of these few Letters should have the effect of sending me
to the Post-Bag for more.


[1] Herrick.






INTERCEPTED LETTERS, ETC.






LETTER I.

FROM THE PRINCESS CHARLOTTE OF WALES
TO THE LADY BARBARA ASHLER.[1]


My dear Lady Bab, you'll be shockt I'm afraid,
When you hear the sad rumpus your Ponies have made;
Since the time of horse-consuls (now long out of date),
No nags ever made such a stir in the state.
Lord Eldon first heard--and as instantly prayed he
To "God and his King"--that a Popish young Lady
(For tho' you've bright eyes and twelve thousand a year,
It is still but too true you're a Papist, my dear,)
Had insidiously sent, by a tall Irish groom,
Two priest-ridden ponies just landed from Rome,
And so full, little rogues, of pontifical tricks
That the dome of St. Paul was scarce safe from their kicks.

Off at once to Papa in a flurry he flies--
For Papa always does what these statesmen advise
On condition that they'll be in turn so polite
As in no case whate'er to advise him _too right_--
"Pretty doings are here, Sir (he angrily cries,
While by dint of dark eyebrows he strives to look wise)--
"'Tis a scheme of the Romanists, so help me God!
"To ride over your _most_ Royal Highness roughshod--
"Excuse, Sir, my tears--they're from loyalty's source-
"Bad enough 'twas for Troy to be sackt by a _Horse_,
"But for us to be ruined by _Ponies_ still worse!"
Quick a Council is called--the whole Cabinet sits--
The Archbishops declare, frightened out of their wits,
That if once Popish Ponies should eat at my manger,
From that awful moment the Church is in danger!
As, give them but stabling and shortly no stalls
Will suit their proud stomachs but those at St. Paul's.

The Doctor,[2] and he, the devout man of Leather,[3]
Vansittart, now laying their Saint-heads together,
Declare that these skittish young abominations
Are clearly foretold in Chap. vi. Revelations--
Nay, they verily think they could point out the one
Which the Doctor's friend Death was to canter upon.

  Lord Harrowby hoping that no one imputes
To the Court any fancy to persecute brutes,
Protests on the word of himself and his cronies
That had these said creatures been Asses, not Ponies,
The Court would have started no sort of objection,
As Asses were, _there_, always sure of protection.

  "If the Princess _will_ keep them (says Lord Castlereagh),
"To make them quite harmless, the only true way
"Is (as certain Chief Justices do with their wives)
"To flog them within half an inch of their lives.
"If they've any bad Irish blood lurking about,
"This (he knew by experience) would soon draw it out."
Should this be thought cruel his Lordship proposes
"The new _Veto_ snaffle[4] to bind down their noses--
"A pretty contrivance made out of old chains,
"Which appears to indulge while it doubly restrains;
"Which, however high-mettled, their gamesomeness checks
"(Adds his Lordship humanely), or else breaks their necks!"

  This proposal received pretty general applause
From the Statesmen around-and the neck-breaking clause
Had a vigor about it, which soon reconciled
Even Eldon himself to a measure so mild.
So the snaffles, my dear, were agreed to _nem. con_.,
And my Lord Castlereagh, having so often shone
In the _fettering line_, is to buckle them on.
I shall drive to your door in these _Vetoes_ some day,
But, at present, adieu!-I must hurry away
To go see my Mamma, as I'm suffered to meet her
For just half an hour by the Queen's best repeater.

CHARLOTTE.


[1] This young Lady, who is a Roman Catholic, had lately made a present of
some beautiful Ponies to the Princess.

[2] Mr. Addington, so nicknamed.

[3] Alluding to a tax lately laid upon leather.

[4] The question whether a Veto was to be allowed to the Crown in the
appointment of Irish Catholic Bishops was, at this time, very generally
and actively agitated.






LETTER II.

FROM COLONEL M'MAHON TO GOULD FRANCIS LECKIE, ESQ.


DEAR SIR--
  I've just had time to look
Into your very learned Book,
Wherein--as plain as man can speak.
Whose English is half modern Greek--
You prove that we can ne'er intrench
Our happy isles against the French,
Till Royalty in England's made
A much more independent trade;--
In short until the House of Guelph
Lays Lords and Commons on the shelf,
And boldly sets up for itself.

  All that can well be understood
In this said Book is vastly good;
And as to what's incomprehensible,
I dare be sworn 'tis full as sensible.

  But to your work's immortal credit
The Prince, good Sir, the Prince has read it
(The only Book, himself remarks,
Which he has read since Mrs. Clarke's).
Last levee-morn he lookt it thro',
During that awful hour or two
Of grave tonsorial preparation,
Which to a fond, admiring nation
Sends forth, announced by trump and drum,
The best-wigged Prince in Christendom.

  He thinks with you, the imagination
Of _partnership_ in legislation
Could only enter in the noddles
Of dull and ledger-keeping twaddles,
Whose heads on _firms_ are running so,
They even must have a King and Co.,
And hence most eloquently show forth
On _checks_ and _balances_ and so forth.

  But now, he trusts, we're coming near a
Far more royal, loyal era;
When England's monarch need but say,
"Whip me those scoundrels, Castlereagh!"
Or, "Hang me up those Papists, Eldon,"
And 'twill be done--ay, faith, and well done.

  With view to which I've his command
To beg, Sir, from your travelled hand,
(Round which the foreign graces swarm)[1]
A Plan of radical Reform;
Compiled and chosen as best you can,
In Turkey or at Ispahan,
And quite upturning, branch and root,
Lords, Commons, and Burdett to boot.

  But, pray, whate'er you may impart, write
Somewhat more brief than Major Cartwright:
Else, tho' the Prince be long in rigging,
'Twould take at least a fortnight's wigging,--
Two wigs to every paragraph--
Before he well could get thro' half.

  You'll send it also speedily--
As truth to say 'twixt you and me,
His Highness, heated by your work,
Already thinks himself Grand Turk!
And you'd have laught, had you seen how
He scared the Chancellor just now,
When (on his Lordship's entering puft) he
Slapt his back and called him "Mufti!"

  The tailors too have got commands
To put directly into hands
All sorts of Dulimans and Pouches,
With Sashes, Turbans and Paboutches,
(While Yarmouth's sketching out a plan
Of new _Moustaches  l'Ottomane_)
And all things fitting and expedient
To _turkify_ our gracious Regent!

  You therefore have no time to waste--
So, send your System.--
                Yours in haste.

POSTSCRIPT.

Before I send this scrawl away,
I seize a moment just to say
There's some parts of the Turkish system
So vulgar 'twere as well you missed 'em.
For instance--in _Seraglio_ matters--
Your Turk whom girlish fondness flatters,
Would fill his Haram (tasteless fool!)
With tittering, red-cheekt things from school.
But _here_ (as in that fairy land,
Where Love and Age went hand in hand;[2]
Where lips, till sixty, shed no honey,
And Grandams were worth any money,)
_Our_ Sultan has much riper notions--
So, let your list of _she_-promotions
Include those only plump and sage,
Who've reached the _regulation_-age;
That is, (as near as one can fix
From Peerage dates) full fifty-six.

  This rule's for _favorites_--nothing more--
For, as to _wives_, a Grand Signor,
Tho' not decidedly _without_ them,
Need never care one curse about them.


[1] "The truth indeed seems to be, that having lived so long abroad as
evidently to have lost, in a great degree, the use of his native language,
Mr. Leckie has gradually come not only to speak, but to feel, like a
foreigner."--_Edinburgh Review_.

[2] The learned Colonel must allude here to a description of the
Mysterious Isle, in the History of Abdalla, Son of Hanif, where such
inversions of the order of nature are said to have taken place.--"A score
of old women and the same number of old men played here and there in the
court, some at chuck-farthing, others at tip-cat or at cockles."--And
again, "There is nothing, believe me, more engaging than those lovely
wrinkles."--See "_Tales of the East_," vol. iii. pp. 607, 608.






LETTER III.

FROM GEORGE PRINCE REGENT TO
THE EARL OF YARMOUTH.[1]


We missed you last night at the "hoary old sinner's,"
Who gave us as usual the cream of good dinners;
His soups scientific, his fishes quite _prime_--
His _pts_ superb, and his cutlets sublime!
In short, 'twas the snug sort of dinner to stir a
Stomachic orgasm in my Lord Ellenborough,
Who _set to_, to be sure, with miraculous force,
And exclaimed between mouthfuls, "a _He-Cook_, of course!--
"While you live--(what's there under that cover? pray, look)--
"While you live--(I'll just taste it)--ne'er keep a She-Cook.
"'Tis a sound Salic Law--(a small bit of that toast)--
"Which ordains that a female shall ne'er rule the roast;
"For Cookery's a secret--(this turtle's uncommon)--
"Like Masonry, never found out by a woman!"

  The dinner you know was in gay celebration
Of _my_ brilliant triumph and Hunt's condemnation;
A compliment too to his Lordship the Judge
For his Speech to the Jury--and zounds! who would grudge
Turtle soup tho' it came to five guineas a bowl,
To reward such a loyal and complaisant soul?
We were all in high gig--Roman Punch and Tokay
Travelled round till our heads travelled just the same way;
And we cared not for Juries or Libels--no--damme! nor
Even for the threats of last Sunday's Examiner!

  More good things were eaten than said--but Tom Tyrrhitt
In quoting Joe Miller you know has some merit;
And hearing the sturdy Judiciary Chief
Say--sated with turtle--"I'll now try the beef"--
Tommy whispered him (giving his Lordship a sly hit)
"I fear 'twill be _hung_-beef, my Lord, if you _try_ it!"

  And Camden was there, who that morning had gone
To fit his new Marquis's coronet on;
And the dish set before him--oh! dish well-devised!--
Was what old Mother Glasse calls, "a calf's head surprised!"
The _brains_ were near Sherry and _once_ had been fine,
But of late they had lain so long soaking in wine,
That tho' we from courtesy still chose to call
These brains very fine they were no brains at all.

  When the dinner was over, we drank, every one
In a bumper, "the venial delights of Crim. Con.;"
At which Headfort with warm reminiscences gloated,
And Ellenb'rough chuckled to hear himself quoted.

  Our next round of toasts was a fancy quite new,
For we drank--and you'll own 'twas benevolent too--
To those well-meaning husbands, cits, parsons or peers,
Whom we've any time honored by courting their dears:
This museum of wittols was comical rather;
Old Headfort gave Massey, and _I_ gave your father.
In short, not a soul till this morning would budge--
We were all fun and frolic, and even the Judge
Laid aside for the time his juridical fashion,
And thro' the whole night wasn't _once_ in a passion!

  I write this in bed while my whiskers are airing,
And Mac[2] has a sly dose of jalap preparing
For poor Tommy Tyrrhitt at breakfast to quaff--
As I feel I want something to give me a laugh,
And there's nothing so good as old Tommy kept close
To his Cornwall accounts after taking a dose.


[1] This letter, as the reader will perceive, was written the day after a
dinner given by the Marquis of Headfort.

[2] Colonel M'Mahon.






LETTER IV.

FROM THE RIGHT HON. PATRICK DUIGENAN
TO THE RIGHT HON. SIR JOHN NICHOL.


Last week, dear Nichol, making merry
At dinner with our Secretary,
When all were drunk or pretty near
(The time for doing business here),
Says he to me, "Sweet Bully Bottom!
"These Papist dogs--hiccup--'od rot 'em!--
"Deserve to be bespattered--hiccup--
"With all the dirt even _you_ can pick up.
"But, as the Prince (here's to him--fill--
"Hip, hip, hurra!)--is trying still
"To humbug them with kind professions,
"And as _you_ deal in _strong_ expressions--
"_Rogue"--"traitor_"--hiccup--and all that--
"You must be muzzled, Doctor Pat!--
"You must indeed--hiccup--that's flat."--

Yes--"muzzled" was the word Sir John--
These fools have clapt a muzzle on
The boldest mouth that e'er run o'er
With slaver of the times of yore![1]--
Was it for this that back I went
As far as Lateran and Trent,
To prove that they who damned us then
Ought now in turn be damned again?
The silent victim still to sit
Of Grattan's fire and Canning's wit,
To hear even noisy Mathew gabble on,
Nor mention once the Whore of Babylon!
Oh! 'tis too much--who now will be
The Nightman of No-Popery?
What Courtier, Saint or even Bishop
Such learned filth will ever fish up?
If there among our ranks be one
To take my place, 'tis _thou_, Sir John;
Thou who like me art dubbed Right Hon.
Like me too art a Lawyer Civil
That wishes Papists at the devil.

  To whom then but to thee, my friend,
Should Patrick[2] his Port-folio send?
Take it--'tis thine--his learned Port-folio,
With all its theologic olio
Of Bulls, half Irish and half Roman--
Of Doctrines now believed by no man--
Of Councils held for men's salvation,
Yet always ending in damnation--
(Which shows that since the world's creation
Your Priests, whate'er their gentle shamming,
Have always had a taste for damning,)
And many more such pious scraps,
To prove (what _we've_ long proved, perhaps,)
That mad as Christians used to be
About the Thirteenth Century,
There still are Christians to be had
In this, the Nineteenth, just as mad!

  Farewell--I send with this, dear Nichol,
A rod or two I've had in pickle
Wherewith to trim old Grattan's jacket.--
The rest shall go by Monday's packet.

P. D.

_Among the Enclosures in the foregoing Letter was the following
"Unanswerable Argument against the Papists_."

We're told the ancient Roman nation
Made use of spittle in lustration;
(_Vide "Lactantium ap. Gallaeum"_[3]--
_i. e_. you need not _read_ but _see_ 'em;)
Now Irish Papists--fact surprising--
Make use of spittle in baptizing;
Which proves them all, O'Finns, O'Fagans,
Connors and Tooles all downright Pagans.
This fact's enough; let no one tell us
To free such sad, _salivous_ fellows.--
No, no--the man, baptized with spittle,
Hath no truth in him--not a tittle!


[1] In sending this sheet to the Press, however, I learn that the "muzzle"
has been taken off, and the Right Hon. Doctor again let loose!

[2] A bad name for poetry; but Duigenan is still worse.

[3] I have taken the trouble of examining the Doctor's reference here, and
find him for once correct.






LETTER V.

FROM THE COUNTESS DOWAGER OF CORK TO LADY---.


My dear Lady---! I've been just sending out
About five hundred cards for a snug little Rout--
(By the by, you've seen "Rokeby"?--this moment got mine--
The "Mail-Coach Edition"--prodigiously fine!)
But I can't conceive how in this very cold weather
I'm ever to bring my five hundred together;
As, unless the thermometer's near boiling heat,
One can never get half of one's hundreds to meet.

(Apropos--you'd have thought to see Townsend last night,
Escort to their chairs, with his staff, so polite,
The "three maiden Miseries," all in a fright;
Poor Townsend, like Mercury, filling two posts,
Supervisor of _thieves_ and chief-usher of _ghosts_!)

  But, my dear Lady----, can't you hit on some notion,
At least for one night to set London in motion?--
As to having the Regent, _that_ show is gone by--
Besides, I've remarkt that (between you and I)
The Marchesa and he, inconvenient in more ways,
Have taken much lately to whispering in doorways;
Which--considering, you know, dear, the _size_ of the two--
Makes a block that one's company _cannot_ get thro';
And a house such as mine is, with door-ways so small,
Has no room for such cumbersome love-work at all.--
(Apropos, tho', of love-work--you've heard it, I hope,
That Napoleon's old mother's to marry the Pope,--
"What a comical pair!)--but, to stick to my Rout,
'Twill be hard if some novelty can't be struck out.
Is there no Algerine, no Kamchatkan arrived?
No Plenipo Pacha, three-tailed and ten-wived?
No Russian whose dissonant consonant name
Almost rattles to fragments the trumpet of fame?

  I remember the time three or four winters back,
When--provided their wigs were but decently black--
A few Patriot monsters from Spain were a sight
That would people one's house for one, night after night.
But--whether the Ministers _pawed_ them too much--
(And you--know how they spoil whatsoever they touch)
Or, whether Lord George (the young man about town)
Has by dint of bad poetry written them down.
One has certainly lost one's _peninsular_ rage;
And the only stray Patriot seen for an age
Has been at such places (think, how the fit cools!)
As old Mrs. Vaughan's or Lord Liverpool's.

  But, in short, my dear, names like Wintztschitstopschinzoudhoff
Are the only things now make an evening go smooth off:
So, get me a Russian--till death I'm your debtor--
If he brings the whole Alphabet, so much the better.
And--Lord! if he would but, _in character_, sup
Off his fish-oil and candles, he'd quite set me up!

  _Au revoir_, my sweet girl--I must leave you in haste--
Little Gunter has brought me the Liqueurs to taste.

POSTSCRIPT.

By the by, have you found any friend that can conster
That Latin account, t'other day, of a Monster?[1]
If we can't get a Russian, and _that think_ in Latin
Be not _too_ improper, I think I'll bring that in.


[1] Alluding, I suppose, to the Latin Advertisement of a _lusus
Naturae_ in the Newspapers lately.






LETTER VI.

FROM ABDALLAH,[1] IN LONDON, TO MOHASSAN, IN ISPAHAN.


Whilst thou, Mohassan, (happy thou!)
Dost daily bend thy loyal brow
Before our King--our Asia's treasure!
Nutmeg of Comfort: Rose of Pleasure!--
And bearest as many kicks and bruises
As the said Rose and Nutmeg chooses;
Thy head still near the bowstring's borders.
And but left on till further orders--
Thro' London streets with turban fair,
And caftan floating to the air,
I saunter on, the admiration
Of this short-coated population--
This sewed-up race--this buttoned nation--
Who while they boast their laws so free
Leave not one limb at liberty,
But live with all their lordly speeches
The slaves of buttons and tight breeches.

  Yet tho' they thus their knee-pans fetter
(They're Christians and they know no better)
  In _some_ things they're a thinking nation;
And on Religious Toleration.
I own I like their notions _quite_,
They are so Persian and so right!
You know our Sunnites,[2] hateful dogs!
Whom every pious Shiite flogs
Or longs to flog--'tis true, they pray
To God, but in an ill-bred way;
With neither arms nor legs nor faces
Stuck in their right, canonic places.[3]
'Tis true, they worship Ali's name--
_Their_ heaven and _ours_ are just the same--
(A Persian's Heaven is easily made,
'Tis but black eyes and lemonade.)
Yet tho' we've tried for centuries back--
We can't persuade this stubborn pack,
By bastinadoes, screws or nippers,
To wear the establisht pea-green slippers.[4]
Then, only think, the libertines!
They wash their toes--they comb their chins,
With many more such deadly sins;
And what's the worst, (tho' last I rank it)
Believe the Chapter of the Blanket!

  Yet spite of tenets so flagitious,
(Which _must_ at bottom be seditious;
Since no man living would refuse
Green slippers but from treasonous views;
Nor wash his toes but with intent
To overturn the government,)--
Such is our mild and tolerant way,
We only curse them twice a day
(According to a Form that's set),
And, far from torturing, only let
All orthodox believers beat 'em,
And twitch their beards where'er they meet 'em.

  As to the rest, they're free to do
Whate'er their fancy prompts them to,
Provided they make nothing of it
Towards rank or honor, power or profit;
Which things we naturally expect,
Belong to US, the Establisht sect,
Who disbelieve (the Lord be thanked!)
The aforesaid Chapter of the Blanket.
The same mild views of Toleration
Inspire, I find, this buttoned nation,
Whose Papists (full as given to rogue,
And only Sunnites with a brogue)
Fare just as well, with all their fuss,
As rascal Sunnites do with us.

  The tender Gazel I enclose
Is for my love, my Syrian Rose--
Take it when night begins to fall,
And throw it o'er her mother's wall.

GAZEL.

Rememberest thou the hour we past,--
That hour the happiest and the last?
Oh! not so sweet the Siha thorn
To summer bees at break of morn,
Not half so sweet, thro' dale and dell,
To Camels' ears the tinkling bell,
As is the soothing memory
Of that one precious hour to me.

How can we live, so far apart?
Oh! why not rather, heart to heart,
    United live and die--
Like those sweet birds, that fly together,
With feather always touching feather,
    Linkt by a hook and eye![5]


[1] I have made many inquiries about this Persian gentleman, but cannot
satisfactorily ascertain who he is. From his notions of Religious Liberty,
however, I conclude that he is an importation of Ministers; and he has
arrived just in time to assist the Prince and Mr. Leckie in their new
Oriental Plan of Reform.--See the second of these letters.--How Abdallah's
epistle to Ispahan found its way into the Twopenny Post-Bag is more than I
can pretend to account for.

[2] Sunnites and Shiites are the two leading sects into which the
Mahometan world is divided; and they have gone on cursing and persecuting
each other, without any intermission, for about eleven hundred years. The
_Sunni_ is the established sect in Turkey, and the _Shia_ in
Persia; and the differences between them turn chiefly upon those important
points, which our pious friend Abdallah, is the true spirit of Shiite
Ascendency, reprobates in this Letter.

[3] "In contradistinction to the Sounis, who in their prayers cross their
hands on the lower part of the breasts, the Schiahs drop their arms in
straight lines; and as the Sounis, at certain periods of the prayer, press
their foreheads on the ground or carpet, the Schiahs," etc.--_Forster's
Voyage_.

[4] "The Shiites wear green slippers, which the Sunnites consider as a
great abomination."--_Mariti_.

[5] This will appear strange to an English reader, but it is literally
translated from Abdallah's Persian, and the curious bird to which he
alludes is the _Juftak_, of which I find the following account in
Richardson:--"A sort of bird, that is said to have but one wing; on the
opposite side to which the male has a hook and the female a ring, so that,
when they fly, they are fastened together."






LETTER VII.

FROM MESSRS. LACKINGTON AND CO. TO THOMAS MOORE, ESQ.


Per Post, Sir, we send your MS.--look it thro'--
Very sorry--but can't undertake--'twouldn't do.
Clever work, Sir!--would _get up_ prodigiously well--
Its only defect is--it never would sell.
And tho' _Statesmen_ may glory in being _unbought_,
In an _Author_ 'tis not so desirable thought.

  Hard times, Sir, most books are too dear to be read--
Tho' the _gold_ of Good-sense and Wit's _small-change_ are fled,
Yet the paper we Publishers pass, in their stead,
Rises higher each day, and ('tis frightful to think it)
Not even such names as Fitzgerald's can sink it!

  However, Sir--if you're for trying again,
And at somewhat that's vendible--we are your men.

  Since the Chevalier Carr[1] took to marrying lately,
The Trade is in want of a _Traveller_ greatly--
No job, Sir, more easy--your _Country_ once planned,
A month aboard ship and a fortnight on land
Puts your Quarto of Travels, Sir, clean out of hand.

  An East-India pamphlet's a thing that would tell--
And a lick at the Papists is _sure_ to sell well.
Or--supposing you've nothing _original_ in you--
Write Parodies, Sir, and such fame it will win you,
You'll get to the Blue-stocking Routs of Albinia![2]
(Mind--_not_ to her _dinners_--a _second-hand_ Muse
Mustn't think of aspiring to _mess_ with the _Blues_.)
Or--in case nothing else in this world you can do--
The deuce is in't, Sir, if you can not _review_!

  Should you feel any touch of _poetical_ glow,
We've a Scheme to suggest--Mr. Scott, you must know,
(Who, we're sorry to say it, now works for _the Row_.[3])
Having quitted the Borders to seek new renown,
Is coming by long Quarto stages to Town;
And beginning with "Rokeby" (the job's sure to pay)
Means to _do_ all the Gentlemen's Seats on the way.
Now, the Scheme is (tho' none of our hackneys can beat him)
To start a fresh Poet thro' Highgate to _meet_ him;
Who by means of quick proofs--no revises--long coaches--
May do a few Villas before Scott approaches.
Indeed if our Pegasus be not curst shabby,
He'll reach, without foundering, at least Woburn Abbey.
Such, Sir, is our plan--if you're up to the freak,
'Tis a match! and we'll put you _in training_ next week.
At present, no more--in reply to this Letter,
A line will oblige very much
      Yours, _et cetera_.

_Temple of the Muses_.


[1] Sir John Carr, the author of "Tours in Ireland, Holland. Sweden," etc.

[2] This alludes, I believe, to a curious correspondence, which is said to
have passed lately between Albina, Countess of Buckinghamshire, and a
certain ingenious Parodist.

[3] Paternoster Row.






LETTER VIII.

FROM COLONEL THOMAS TO ---- SKEFFINGTON, ESQ.


Come to our Fte and bring with thee
Thy newest, best embroidery.
Come to our Fte and show again
That pea-green coat, thou pink of men,
Which charmed all eyes that last surveyed it;
When Brummel's self inquired "who made it?"--
When Cits came wondering from the East
And thought thee Poet Pye _at least_!

  Oh! come, (if haply 'tis thy week
For looking pale,) with paly cheek;
Tho' more we love thy roseate days,
When the rich rouge-pot pours its blaze
Full o'er thy face and amply spread,
Tips even thy whisker-tops with red--
Like the last tints of dying Day
That o'er some darkling grove delay.

  Bring thy best lace, thou gay Philander,
(That lace, like Harry Alexander,
Too precious to be washt,) thy _rings_,
Thy seals--in short, thy prettiest things!
Put all thy wardrobe's glories on,
And yield in frogs and fringe to none
But the great Regent's self alone;
Who--by particular desire--
_For that night only_, means to hire
A dress from, Romeo Coates, Esquire.[1]
Hail, first of Actors! best of Regents!
Born for each other's fond allegiance!
_Both_ gay Lotharios--both good dressers--
Of serious Farce _both_ learned Professors--
_Both_ circled round, for use or show,
With cock's combs, wheresoe'er they go![2]

  Thou knowest the time, thou man of lore!
It takes to chalk a ball-room floor--
Thou knowest the time, too, well-a-day!
It takes to dance that chalk away.[3]
The Ball-room opens--far and nigh
Comets and suns beneath us lie;
O'er snow-white moons and stars we walk,
And the floor seems one sky of chalk!
But soon shall fade that bright deceit,
When many a maid, with busy feet
That sparkle in the lustre's ray,
O'er the white path shall bound and play
Like Nymphs along the Milky Way:--
With every step a star hath fled,
And suns grow dim beneath their tread,
So passeth life--(thus Scott would write,
And spinsters read him with delight,)--
Hours are not feet, yet hours trip on,
Time is not chalk, yet time's soon gone!

  But, hang this long digressive flight!--
I meant to say, thou'lt see that night
What falsehood rankles in their hearts,
Who say the Prince neglects the arts--
Neglects the arts?--no, Strahlweg,[4] no;
_Thy_ Cupids answer "'tis not so;"
And every floor that night shall tell
How quick thou daubest and how well.
Shine as thou mayst in French vermilion,
Thou'rt _best_ beneath a French cotillion;
And still comest off, whate'er thy faults,
With _flying colors_ in a Waltz.
Nor needest thou mourn the transient date
To thy best works assigned by fate.
While _some chef-d'oeuvres_ live to weary one,
_Thine_ boast a short life and a merry one;
Their hour of glory past and gone
With "Molly put the kettle on!"[5]

  But, bless my soul! I've scarce a leaf
Of paper left--so must be brief.
  This festive Fte, in fact, will be
The former Fte's _facsimile_;[6]
The same long Masquerade of Rooms,
All trickt up in such odd costumes,
(These, Porter,[7] are thy glorious works!)
You'd swear Egyptians, Moors and Turks,
Bearing Good-Taste some deadly malice,
Had clubbed to raise a Pic-Nic Palace;
And each to make the olio pleasant
Had sent a State-Room as a present.
The same _fauteuils_ and girondoles--
The same gold Asses,[8]pretty souls!
That in this rich and classic dome
Appear so perfectly at home.
The same bright river 'mong the dishes,
But _not_--ah! not the same dear fishes--
Late hours and claret killed the old ones--
So 'stead of silver and of gold ones,
(It being rather hard to raise
Fish of that _specie_ now-a-days)
Some sprats have been by Yarmouth's wish,
Promoted into _Silver_ Fish,
And Gudgeons (so Vansittart told
The Regent) are as good as _Gold_!

  So, prithee, come--our Fte will be
But half a Fte if wanting thee.


[1] An amateur actor of much risible renown.

[2] The crest of Mr. Coates, the very amusing amateur tragedian here
alluded to, was a cock; and most profusely were his liveries, harness,
etc. covered wit this ornament.

[3] To those who neither go to balls nor read _The Morning Post_, it may
be necessary to mention, that the floors of Ballrooms, in general, are
chalked for safety and for ornament with various fanciful devices.

[4] A foreign artist much patronized by the Prince Regent.

[5] The name of a popular country-dance.

[6] "Carleton House will exhibit a complete _facsimile_ in respect to
interior ornament, to what it did at the last Fte. The same splendid
draperies," etc.--_Morning Post_.

[7] Mr. Walsh Porter, to whose taste was left the furnishing of the rooms
of Carletone House.

[8] The salt-cellars on the Prince's _own_ table were in the form of an
Ass with panniers.


       *       *       *       *       *

APPENDIX.




LETTER IV. PAGE 584.


Among the papers, enclosed in Dr. Duigenan's Letter, was found an Heroic
Epistle in Latin verse, from Pope Joan to her Lover, of which, as it is
rather a curious document, I shall venture to give some account. This
female Pontiff was a native of England, (or, according to others of
Germany,) who at an early age disguised herself in male attire and
followed her lover, a young ecclesiastic, to Athens where she studied with
such effect that upon her arrival at Rome she was thought worthy of being
raised to the Pontificate. This Epistle is addressed to her Lover (whom
she had elevated to the dignity of Cardinal), soon after the fatal
_accouchement_, by which her Fallibility was betrayed.

She begins by reminding him tenderly of the time, when they were together
at Athens--when, as she says,

   --"by Ilissus' stream
  "We whispering walkt along, and learned to speak
  "The tenderest feelings in the purest Greek;
  "Ah! then how little did we think or hope,
  "Dearest of men, that I should e'er be Pope![1]
  "That I, the humble Joan, whose housewife art
  "Seemed just enough to keep thy house and heart,
  "(And those, alas! at sixes and at sevens,)
  "Should soon keep all the keys of all the heavens!"

Still less (she continues to say) could they have foreseen, that such
a catastrophe as had happened in Council would befall them--that she

  "Should thus surprise the Conclave's grave decorum,
  "And let a _little Pope_ pop out before 'em--
  "Pope _Innocent_! alas, the only one
  "That name could e'er be justly fixt upon."

She then very pathetically laments the downfall of her greatness, and
enumerates the various treasures to which she is doomed to bid farewell
forever:--

  "But oh, more dear, more precious ten times over--
  "Farewell my Lord, my Cardinal, my Lover!
  "I made _thee_ Cardinal--thou madest _me_--ah!
  "Thou madest the Papa of the world Mamma!"

I have not time at present to translate any more of this Epistle; but I
presume the argument which the Right Hon. Doctor and his friends mean to
deduce from it, is (in their usual convincing strain) that Romanists must
be unworthy of Emancipation _now_, because they had a Petticoat Pope in
the Ninth Century. Nothing can be more logically clear, and I find that
Horace had exactly the same views upon the subject.

    Romanus (_eheu posteri negabitis_!)
    emancipatus FOEMINAE
    _fert vallum_!


[1] Spanheim attributes the unanimity with which Joan was elected to that
innate and irresistible charm by which her sex, though latent, operated
upon the instinct of the Cardinals.




LETTER VII. PAGE 588.


The Manuscript, found enclosed in the Bookseller's Letter, turns out to be
a Melo-Drama, in two Acts, entitled "The Book,"[1] of which the Theatres,
of course, had had the refusal, before it was presented to Messrs.
Lackington and Co. This rejected Drama however possesses considerable
merit and I shall take the liberty of laying a sketch of it before my
Readers.

The first Act opens in a very awful manner--_Time_, three o'clock in
the morning--_Scene_, the Bourbon Chamber[2] in Carleton House--
Enter the Prince Regent _solus_--After a few broken sentences, he
thus exclaims:--

    Away--Away--
  Thou haunt'st my fancy so, thou devilish Book,
  I meet thee--trace thee, whereso'er I look.
  I see thy damned _ink_ in Eldon's brows--
  I see thy _foolscap_ on my Hertford's Spouse--
  Vansittart's head recalls thy _leathern_ case,
  And all thy _blank-leaves_ stare from R--d--r's face!
  While, turning here (_laying his hand on his heart_,)
        I find, ah wretched elf,
  Thy _List_ of dire _Errata_ in myself.
    (_Walks the stage in considerable agitation_.)
  Oh Roman Punch! oh potent Curaoa!
  Oh Mareschino! Mareschino oh!
  Delicious drams! why have you not the art
  To kill this gnawing _Book-worm_ in my heart?

He is here interrupted in his Soliloquy by perceiving on the ground some
scribbled fragments of paper, which he instantly collects, and "by the
light of two magnificent candelabras" discovers the following unconnected
words, "_Wife neglected"--"the Book"--"Wrong Measures"--"the Queen"--"Mr.
Lambert"--"the Regent_."

  Ha! treason in my house!--Curst words, that wither
  My princely soul, (_shaking the papers violently_) what Demon
      brought you hither?
  "My Wife;"--"the Book" too!--stay--a nearer look--
  (_holding the fragments closer to the Candelabras_)
  Alas! too plain, B, double O, K, Book--
  Death and destruction!

He here rings all the bells, and a whole legion of valets enter. A scene
of cursing and swearing (very much in the German style) ensues, in the
course of which messengers are despatched, in different directions, for
the Lord Chancellor, the Duke of Cumberland, etc. The intermediate time is
filled up by another Soliloquy, at the conclusion of which the aforesaid
Personages rush on alarmed; the Duke with his stays only half-laced, and
the Chancellor with his wig thrown hastily over an old red night-cap, "to
maintain the becoming splendor of his office."[3] The Regent produces the
appalling fragments, upon which the Chancellor breaks out into
exclamations of loyalty and tenderness, and relates the following
portentous dream:

    'Tis scarcely two hours since
  I had a fearful dream of thee, my Prince!--
  Methought I heard thee midst a courtly crowd
  Say from thy throne of gold, in mandate loud,
  "Worship my whiskers!"--(_weeps_) not a knee was there
  But bent and worshipt the Illustrious Pair,
  Which curled in conscious majesty! (_pulls out his handkerchief_)--
    while cries
  Of "Whiskers; whiskers!" shook the echoing skies.--
  Just in that glorious hour, me-thought, there came,
  With looks of injured pride, a Princely Dame
  And a young maiden, clinging by her side,
  As if she feared some tyrant would divide
  Two hearts that nature and affection tied!
  The Matron came--within her _right_ hand glowed
  A radiant torch; while from her _left_ a load
  Of Papers hung--(_wipes his eyes_) collected in her veil--
  The venal evidence, the slanderous tale,
  The wounding hint, the current lies that pass
  From _Post_ to _Courier_, formed the motley mass;
  Which with disdain before the Throne she throws,
  And lights the Pile beneath thy princely nose.

  (_Weeps_.)

  Heavens, how it blazed!--I'd ask no livelier fire,
  (With animation) To roast a Papist by, my gracious Sire!--
  But ah! the Evidence--_(weeps again)_ I mourned to see--
  Cast as it burned, a deadly light on thee:
  And Tales and Hints their random sparkles flung,
  And hissed and crackled, like an old maid's tongue;
  While _Post_ and _Courier_, faithful to their fame,
  Made up in stink for what they lackt in flame.
  When, lo, ye Gods! the fire ascending brisker,
  Now singes _one_ now lights the _other_ whisker.
  Ah! where was then the Sylphid that unfurls
  Her fairy standard in defence of curls?
  Throne, Whiskers, Wig soon vanisht into smoke,
  The watchman cried "Past One," and--I awoke.

Here his Lordship weeps more profusely than ever, and the Regents (who has
been very much agitated during the recital of the Dream) by a movement as
characteristic as that of Charles XII. when he was shot, claps his hands
to his whiskers to feel if all be really safe. A Privy Council is held--
all the Servants, etc. are examined, and it appears that a Tailor, who had
come to measure the Regent for a Dress (which takes three whole pages of
the best superfine _clinquant_ in describing) was the only person who
had been in the Bourbon Chamber during the day. It is, accordingly,
determined to seize the Tailor, and the Council breaks up with a unanimous
resolution to be vigorous.

The commencement of the Second Act turns chiefly upon the Trial and
Imprisonment of two Brothers[4]--but as this forms the _under_ plot
of the Drama, I shall content myself with extracting from it the following
speech, which is addressed to the two Brothers, as they "_exeunt_
severally" to Prison:--

  Go to your prisons--tho' the air of Spring
  No mountain coolness to your cheeks shall bring;
  Tho' Summer flowers shall pass unseen away,
  And all your portion of the glorious day
  May be some solitary beam that falls
  At morn or eve upon your dreary walls--
  Some beam that enters, trembling as if awed,
  To tell how gay the young world laughs abroad!
  Yet go--for thoughts as blessed as the air
  Of Spring or Summer flowers await you there;
  Thoughts such as He who feasts his courtly crew
  In rich conservatories _never_ knew;
  Pure self-esteem--the smiles that light within--
  The Zeal, whose circling charities begin
  With the few loved-ones Heaven has placed it near,
  And spread till all Mankind are in its sphere;
  The Pride that suffers without vaunt or plea.
  And the fresh Spirit that can warble free
  Thro' prison-bars its hymn to Liberty!

The Scene next changes to a Tailor's Workshop, and a fancifully-arranged
group of these Artists is discovered upon the Shop-board--Their task
evidently of a _royal_ nature, from the profusion of gold-lace, frogs,
etc., that lie about--They all rise and come forward, while one of them
sings the following Stanzas to the tune of "Derry Down."

  My brave brother Tailors, come, straighten your knees,
  For a moment, like gentlemen, stand up at ease,
  While I sing of our Prince (and a fig for his railers),
  The Shop-board's delight! the Maecenas of Tailors!
        Derry down, down, down
          derry down.

  Some monarchs take roundabout ways into note,
  While _His_ short cut to fame is--the cut of his coat;
  Philip's Son thought the World was too small for his Soul,
  But our Regent's finds room in a laced button-hole.
                  Derry down, etc.

  Look thro' all Europe's Kings--those, at least, who go loose--
  Not a King of them all's such a friend to the Goose.
  So, God keep him increasing in size and renown,
  Still the fattest and best fitted Prince about town!
                  Derry down, etc.

During the "Derry down" of this last verse, a messenger from the Secretary
of State's Office rushes on, and the singer (who, luckily for the effect
of the scene, is the very Tailor suspected of the mysterious fragments) is
interrupted in the midst of his laudatory exertions and hurried away, to
the no small surprise and consternation of his comrades. The Plot now
hastens rapidly in its development--the management of the Tailor's
examination is highly skilful, and the alarm which he is made to betray is
natural without being ludicrous. The explanation too which he finally
gives is not more simple than satisfactory. It appears that the said
fragments formed part of a self-exculpatory note, which he had intended to
send to Colonel M'Mahon upon subjects purely professional, and the
corresponding bits (which still lie luckily in his pocket) being produced
and skilfully laid beside the others, the following _billet-doux_ is the
satisfactory result of their juxtaposition,

  Honored Colonel--my Wife, who's the Queen of all slatterns,
  Neglected to put up the Book of new Patterns.
  She sent the wrong Measures too--shamefully wrong--
  They're the same used for poor Mr. Lambert, when young;
  But, bless you! they wouldnt go half round the Regent--
  So, hope you'll excuse yours till death, most obedient.

This fully explains the whole mystery--the Regent resumes his wonted
smiles, and the Drama terminates as usual to the satisfaction of all
parties.


[1] There was, in like manner, a mysterious Book, in the 16th Century,
which employed all the anxious curiosity of the Learned of that time.
Every one spoke of it; many wrote against it; though it does not appear
that anybody had ever seen it; and Grotius is of opinion that no such Book
ever existed. It was entitled, "_Liber de tribus impostoribus_." (See
Morhof. Cap. "_de Libris damnatis_.")

[2] The same Chamber, doubtless, that was prepared for the reception of
the Bourbons at the first Grand Fte, and which was ornamented (all "for
the Deliverance of Europe") with _fleurs de-lys_.

[3] "To enable the individual who holds the office of Chancellor to
maintain it in becoming splendor."  (_A loud laugh_.)--Lord
CASTLEREAGH'S _Speech upon the Vice Chancellor's Bill_.

[4] Mr. Leigh Hunt and his brother.








SATIRICAL AND HUMOROUS POEMS.






THE INSURRECTION OF THE PAPERS.

A DREAM.


    "It would be impossible for his Royal Highness to disengage his person
    from the accumulating pile of papers that encompassed it."
    --Lord CASTLEREAGH'S _Speech upon Colonel M Mahon's Appointment,
    April 14, 1812_.


Last night I tost and turned in bed,
But could not sleep--at length I said,
"I'll think of Viscount Castlereagh,
"And of his speeches--that's the way."
And so it was, for instantly
I slept as sound as sound could be.
And then I dreamt--so dread a dream!
Fuseli has no such theme;
Lewis never wrote or borrowed
Any horror half so horrid!

Methought the Prince in whiskered state
Before me at his breakfast sate;
On one side lay unread Petitions,
On t'other, Hints from five Physicians!
_Here_ tradesmen's bills,--official papers,
Notes from my Lady, drams for vapors
_There_ plans of Saddles, tea and toast.
Death-warrants and _The Morning Post_.

  When lo! the Papers, one and all.
As if at some magician's call.
Began to flutter of themselves
From desk and table, floor and shelves,
And, cutting each some different capers,
Advanced, oh jacobinic papers!
As tho' they said, "Our sole design is
"To suffocate his Royal Highness!"
The Leader of this vile sedition
Was a huge Catholic Petition,
With grievances so full and heavy,
It threatened worst of all the bevy;
Then Common-Hall Addresses came
In swaggering sheets and took their aim
Right at the Regent's well-drest head,
As if _determined_ to be read.
Next Tradesmen's bills began to fly,
And Tradesmen's bills, we know, mount high;
Nay even Death-warrants thought they'd best
Be lively too and join the rest.

  But, oh the basest of defections!
His letter about "predilections"!--
His own dear letter, void of grace,
Now flew up in its parent's face!
Shocked with this breach of filial duty,
He just could murmur "_et_ Tu _Brute_?"
Then sunk, subdued upon the floor
At Fox's bust, to rise no more!

I waked--and prayed, with lifted hand,
"Oh! never may this Dream prove true;
"Tho' paper overwhelms the land,
  "Let it not crush the Sovereign, too!"






PARODY OF A CELEBRATED LETTER.[1]


At length, dearest Freddy, the moment is night
When, with Perceval's leave, I may throw my chains by;
And, as time now is precious, the first thing I do
Is to sit down and write a wise letter to you.

     *     *     *     *
     *     *     *     *
     *     *     *     *
     *     *     *     *
     *     *     *     *
     *     *     *     *
I meant before now to have sent you this Letter,
But Yarmouth and I thought perhaps 'twould be better
To wait till the Irish affairs are decided--
(That is, till both Houses had prosed and divided,
With all due appearance of thought and digestion)--
For, tho' Hertford House had long settled the question,
I thought it but decent, between me and you,
That the two _other_ Houses should settle it too.

  I need not remind you how cursedly bad
Our affairs were all looking, when Father went mad;[2]
A strait waistcoat on him and restrictions on me,
A more _limited_ Monarchy could not well be.
I was called upon then, in that moment of puzzle.
To choose my own Minister--just as they muzzle
A playful young bear, and then mock his disaster
By bidding him choose out his own dancing-master.

  I thought the best way, as a dutiful son,
Was to do as Old Royalty's self would have done.[3]
So I sent word to say, I would keep the whole batch in,
The same chest of tools, without cleansing or patching:
For tools of this kind, like Martinus's sconce.[4]
Would loose all their beauty if purified once;
And think--only think--if our Father should find.
Upon graciously coming again to his mind,[5]
That improvement had spoiled any favorite adviser--
That Rose was grown honest, or Westmoreland wiser--
That R--d--r was, even by one twinkle, the brighter--
Or Liverpool speeches but half a pound lighter--
What a shock to his old royal heart it would be!
No!--far were such dreams of improvement from me:
And it pleased me to find, at the House, where, you know,[6]
There's such good mutton cutlets, and strong curaoa,[7]
That the Marchioness called me a duteous old boy,
And my Yarmouth's red whiskers grew redder for joy.

  You know, my dear Freddy, how oft, if I _would_,
By the law of last sessions I _might_ have done good.
I _might_ have withheld these political noodles
From knocking their heads against hot Yankee Doodles;
I _might_ have told Ireland I pitied her lot,
Might have soothed her with hope--but you know I did not.

And my wish is, in truth, that the best of old fellows
Should not, on recovering, have cause to be jealous,
But find that while he has been laid on the shelf
We've been all of us nearly as mad as himself.
You smile at my hopes--but the Doctors and I
Are the last that can think the King _ever_ will die.[8]

  A new era's arrived[9]--tho' you'd hardly believe it--
And all things of course must be new to receive it.
New villas, new ftes (which even Waithman attends)--
New saddles, new helmets, and--why not _new friends_?

       *       *       *      *       *

I repeat it, "New Friends"--for I cannot describe
The delight I am in with this Perceval tribe.
Such capering!--Such vaporing!--Such rigor!--Such vigor!
North, South, East, and West, they have cut such a figure,
That soon they will bring the whole world round our ears,
And leave us no friends--but Old Nick and Algiers.

  When I think of the glory they've beamed on my chains,
'Tis enough quite to turn my illustrious brains.
It is true we are bankrupts in commerce and riches,
But think how we find our Allies in new breeches!
We've lost the warm hearts of the Irish, 'tis granted,
But then we've got Java, an island much wanted,
To put the last lingering few who remain,
Of the Walcheren warriors, out of their pain.
Then how Wellington fights! and how squabbles his brother!
_For_ Papists the one and _with_ Papists the other;
_One_ crushing Napoleon by taking a City,
While t'other lays waste a whole Catholic Committee.
Oh deeds of renown!--shall I boggle or flinch,
With such prospects before me? by Jove, not an inch.
No--let _England's_ affairs go to rack, if they will,
We'll look after the affairs of the _Continent_ still;
And with nothing at home but starvation and riot,
Find Lisbon in bread and keep Sicily quiet.

  I am proud to declare I have no predilections,[10]
My heart is a sieve where some scattered affections
Are just danced about for a moment or two,
And the _finer_ they are, the more sure to run thro';
Neither feel I resentments, nor wish there should come ill
To mortal--except (now I think on't) Beau Brummel,
Who threatened last year, in a superfine passion,
To cut _me_ and bring the old King into fashion.
This is all I can lay to my conscience at present;
When such is my temper, so neutral, so pleasant,
So royally free from all troublesome feelings,
So little encumbered by faith in my dealings
(And that I'm consistent the world will allow,
What I was at Newmarket the same I am now).
When such are my merits (you know I hate cracking),
I hope, like the Vender of Best Patent Blacking,
"To meet with the generous and kind approbation
"Of a candid, enlightened, and liberal nation."

  By the by, ere I close this magnificent Letter,
(No man, except Pole, could have writ you a better,)
'Twould please me if those, whom I've humbugged so long[11]
With the notion (good men!) that I knew right from wrong,
Would a few of them join me--mind, only a few--
To let _too_ much light in on me never would do;
But even Grey's brightness shan't make me afraid,
While I've Camden and Eldon to fly to for shade;
Nor will Holland's clear intellect do us much harm,
While there's Westmoreland near him to weaken the charm.
As for Moira's high spirit, if aught can subdue it.
Sure joining with Hertford and Yarmouth will do it!
Between R-d-r and Wharton let Sheridan sit,
And the fogs will soon quench even Sheridan's wit:
And against all the pure public feeling that glows
Even in Whitbread himself we've a Host in George Rose!
So in short if they wish to have Places, they may,
And I'll thank you to tell all these matters to Grey.[12]
Who, I doubt not, will write (as there's no time to lose)
By the twopenny post to tell Grenville the news;
And now, dearest Fred (tho' I've no predilection),
Believe me yours always with truest affection.

P.S. A copy of this is to Perceval going[13]
Good Lord, how St. Stephen's will ring with his crowing!


[1] Letter from his Royal Highness the Prince Regent to the Duke of York,
Feb. 13, 1812.

[2] "I think it hardly necessary to call your recollection to the recent
circumstances under which I assumed the authority delegated to me by
Parliament.--_Prince's Letter_.

[3] "My sense of duty to our Royal father solely decided that choice."--
_Ibid_.

[4] The antique shield of Martinus Scriblerus, which, upon scouring,
turned out to be only an old sconce.

[5] "I waived any personal gratification, in order that his Majesty might
resume, on his restoration to health, every power and prerogative," etc.--
_Prince's Letter_.

[6] "And I have the satisfaction of knowing that such was the opinion of
persons for whose judgment," etc--_Ibid_.

[7] The letter-writer's favorite luncheon.

[8] I certainly am the last person in the kingdom to whom it can be
permitted to despair of our royal father's recovery."--_Prince's
Letter_.

[9] "A new era is now arrived, and I cannot but reflect with
satisfaction," etc.--_Ibid_.

[10] "I have no predilections to indulge,--no resentments to gratify."--
_Prince's Letter_.

[11] "I cannot conclude without expressing the gratification I should feel
if some of those persons with whom the early habits of my public life were
formed would strengthen my hands, and constitute a part of my
government"--
_Prince's Letter_.

[12] "You are authorized to communicate these sentiments to Lord Grey,
who, I have no doubt, will make them known to Lord Grenville."--
_Prince's Letter_.

[13] "I shall send a copy of this letter immediately to Mr. Perceval."-
_Prince's Letter_.






ANACREONTIC

TO A PLUMASSIER.


Fine and feathery artisan,
Best of Plumists (if you can
With your art so far presume)
Make for me a Prince's Plume--
Feathers soft and feathers rare,
Such as suits a Prince to wear.

  First thou downiest of men,
Seek me out a fine Pea-hen;
Such a Hen, so tall and grand,
As by Juno's side might stand,
If there were no cocks at hand.
Seek her feathers, soft as down,
Fit to shine on Prince's crown;
If thou canst not find them, stupid!
Ask the way of Prior's Cupid.

Ranging these in order due,
Pluck me next an old Cuckoo;
Emblem of the happy fates
Of easy, kind, cornuted mates.
Pluck him well--be sure you do--
_Who_ wouldnt be an old Cuckoo,
Thus to have his plumage blest,
Beaming on a Royal crest?

  Bravo, Plumist!--now what bird
Shall we find for Plume the third?
You must get a learned Owl,
Bleakest of black-letter fowl--
Bigot bird that hates the light,[1]
Foe to all that's fair and bright.
Seize his quills, (so formed to pen
Books[2] that shun the search of men;
Books that, far from every eye,
In "sweltered venom sleeping" lie,)
Stick them in between the two,
Proud Pea-hen and Old Cuckoo.
Now you have the triple feather,
Bind the kindred stems together
With a silken tie whose hue
Once was brilliant Buff and Blue;
Sullied now--alas, how much!
Only fit for Yarmouth's touch.

  There--enough--thy task is done;
Present, worthy George's Son;
Now, beneath, in letters neat,
Write "I SERVE," and all's complete.


[1] Perceval.

[2] In allusion to "the Book" which created such a sensation at that
period.






EXTRACTS

FROM THE DIARY OF A POLITICIAN.


_Wednesday_.

Thro' Manchester Square took a canter just now--
Met the _old yellow chariot_[1] and made a low bow.
This I did, of course, thinking 'twas loyal and civil,
But got such a look--oh! 'twas black as the devil!
How unlucky!--_incog_. he was travelling about,
And I like a noodle, must go find him out.
_Mem_.--when next by the old yellow chariot I ride,
To remember there _is_ nothing princely inside.

_Thursday_.

At Levee to-day made another sad blunder--
What _can_ be come over me lately, I wonder?
The Prince was as cheerful as if all his life
He had never been troubled with Friends or a Wife--
"Fine weather," says he--to which I, who _must_ prate,
Answered, "Yes, Sir, but _changeable_ rather, of late."
He took it, I fear, for he lookt somewhat gruff,
And handled his new pair of whiskers so rough,
That before all the courtiers I feared they'd come off,
And then, Lord, how Geramb[2] would triumphantly scoff!

_Mem_.--to buy for son Dicky some unguent or lotion
To nourish his whiskers--sure road to promotion![3]

_Saturday_.

Last night a Concert--vastly gay--
Given by Lady Castlereagh.
My Lord loves music, and we know
Has "two strings always to his bow."[4]
In choosing songs, the Regent named
"_Had I a heart for falsehood framed_."
While gentle Hertford begged and prayed
For "_Young I am and sore afraid_."


[1] The _incog_. vehicle of the Prince.

[2] Baron Geramb, the rival of his R. H. in whiskers.

[3] England is not the only country where merit of this kind is noticed
and rewarded. "I remember," says Tavernier, "to have seen one of the King
of Persia's porters, whose mustaches were so long that he could tie them
behind his neck, for which reason he had a double pension."

[4] A rhetorical figure used by Lord Castlereagh, in one of his speeches.






EPIGRAM.


What news to-day?--"Oh! worse and worse--
"Mac[1] is the Prince's Privy Purse!"--
The Prince's _Purse_! no, no, you fool,
You mean the Prince's _Ridicule_.


[1] Colonel M'Mahon.






KING CRACK[1] AND HIS IDOLS.

WRITTEN AFTER THE LATE NEGOTIATION FOR A NEW MINISTRY.


King Crack was the best of all possible Kings,
  (At least, so his Courtiers would swear to you gladly,)
But Crack now and then would do heterodox things,
  And at last took to worshipping _Images_ sadly.

Some broken-down Idols, that long had been placed
  In his father's old _Cabinet_, pleased him so much,
That he knelt down and worshipt, tho'--such was his taste!--
  They were monstrous to look at and rotten to touch.

And these were the beautiful Gods of King Crack!--
  But his People disdaining to worship such things
Cried aloud, one and all, "Come, your Godships must pack--
  "You'll not do for _us_, tho' you _may_ do for _Kings_."

Then trampling these images under their feet,
  They sent Crack a petition, beginning "Great Caesar!
"We're willing to worship; but only entreat
  "That you'll find us some _decenter_ godheads than these are."

"I'll try," says King Crack--so they furnisht him models
  Of better shaped Gods but he sent them all back;
Some were chiselled too fine, some had heads stead of noddles,
  In short they were all _much_ too godlike for Crack.

So he took to his darling old Idols again,
  And just mending their legs and new bronzing their faces,
In open defiance of Gods and of man,
  Set the monsters up grinning once more in their places.

[1] One of these antediluvian Princes, with whom Manetho and Whiston seem
so intimately acquainted. If we had the Memoirs of Thoth, from which
Manetho compiled his History, we should find, I dare say, that Crack was
only a Regent, and that he, perhaps, succeeded Typhon, who (as Whiston
says) was the last King of the Antediluvian Dynasty.






WHAT'S MY THOUGHT LIKE?


_Quest_. Why is a Pump like Viscount Castlereagh?
_Answ_. Because it is a slender thing of wood,
  That up and down its awkward arm doth sway,
  And coolly spout and spout and spout away,
In one weak, washy, everlasting flood!






EPIGRAM.

DIALOGUE BETWEEN A CATHOLIC DELEGATE AND
HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS THE DUKE OF CUMBERLAND.


Said his Highness to Ned,[1] with that grim face of his,
  "Why refuse us the _Veto_, dear Catholic Neddy?"
"Because, Sir," said Ned, looking full in his phiz,
  "You're forbidding enough, in all conscience, already!"


[1] Edward Byrne the head of the Delegates of the Irish Catholics.






WREATHS FOR THE MINISTERS.

AN ANACREONTIC.


Hither, Flora, Queen of Flowers!
Haste thee from old Brompton's bowers--
Or, (if sweeter that abode)
From the King's well-odored Road,
Where each little nursery bud
Breathes the dust and quaffs the mud.
Hither come and gayly twine
Brightest herbs and flowers of thine
Into wreaths for those who rule us,
Those who rule and (some say) fool us--
Flora, sure, will love to please
England's Household Deities![1]

  First you must then, willy-nilly,
Fetch me many an orange lily--
Orange of the darkest dye
Irish Gifford can supply;--
Choose me out the longest sprig,
And stick it in old Eldon's wig.

  Find me next a Poppy posy,
Type of his harangues so dozy,
Garland gaudy, dull and cool,
To crown the head of Liverpool.
'Twill console his brilliant brows
For that loss of laurel boughs,
Which they suffered (what a pity!)
On the road to Paris City.

  Next, our Castlereagh to crown,
Bring me from the County Down,
Withered Shamrocks which have been
Gilded o'er to hide the green--
(Such as Headfort brought away
From Pall-Mall last Patrick's Day)[2]--
Stitch the garland thro' and thro'
With shabby threads _of every hue_--
And as, Goddess!--_entre nous_--
His Lordship loves (tho' best of men)
A little _torture_ now and then,
Crimp the leaves, thou first of Syrens,
Crimp them with thy curling-irons.

  That's enough--away, away--
Had I leisure, I could say
How the _oldest rose_ that grows
Must be pluckt to deck Old Rose--
How the Doctor's[3] brow should smile
Crowned with wreaths of camomile.
But time presses--to thy taste
I leave the rest, so, prithee, haste!


[1] The ancients, in like manner, crowned their Lares, or
Household Gods.

[2] Certain tinsel imitations of the Shamrock which are
distributed by the Servants of Carleton House every Patrick's Day.

[3] The _sobriquet_ given to Lord Sidmouth.






EPIGRAM.

DIALOGUE BETWEEN A DOWAGER AND HER MAID ON THE NIGHT OF LORD YARMOUTH'S
FETE.


"I want the Court Guide," said my lady, "to look
  "If the House, Seymour Place, be at 30. or 20."--
"We've lost the _Court Guide_, Ma'am, but here's _the Red Book_.
  "Where you'll find, I dare say, Seymour _Places_ in plenty!"






HORACE, ODE XI. LIB. II.

FREELY TRANSLATED BY THE PRINCE REGENT.[1]


Come, Yarmouth, my boy, never trouble your brains,
  About what your old crony,
  The Emperor Boney,
Is doing or brewing on Muscovy's plains;

Nor tremble, my lad, at the state of our granaries:
  Should there come famine,
  Still plenty to cram in
You always shall have, my dear Lord of the Stannaries.

Brisk let us revel, while revel we may;
For the gay bloom of fifty soon passes away,
  And then people get fat,
  And infirm, and--all that,
And a wig (I confess it) so clumsily sits,
That it frightens the little Loves out of their wits;

Thy whiskers, too, Yarmouth!--alas, even they,
  Tho' so rosy they burn,
  Too quickly must turn
(What a heart-breaking change for thy whiskers!) to Grey.

Then why, my Lord Warden, oh! why should you fidget
  Your mind about matters you dont understand?
Or why should you write yourself down for an idiot,
  Because "_you_," forsooth, "_have the pen in your hand_!"

  Think, think how much better
  Than scribbling a letter,
  (Which both you and I
  Should avoid by the by,)
How much pleasanter 'tis to sit under the bust
  Of old Charley,[2] my friend here, and drink like a new one;

While Charley looks sulky and frowns at me, just
  As the Ghost in the Pantomime frowns at Don Juan.
  To Crown us, Lord Warden,
  In Cumberland's garden
Grows plenty of _monk's hood_ in venomous sprigs:
  While Otto of Roses
  Refreshing all noses
Shall sweetly exhale from our
    whiskers and wigs.

What youth of the Household will cool our Noyau
  In that streamlet delicious,
  That down midst the dishes,
  All full of gold fishes,
  Romantic doth flow?--
  Or who will repair
Unto Manchester Square,
And see if the gentle _Marchesa_ be there?

  Go--bid her haste hither,
  And let her bring with her
The newest No-Popery Sermon that's going--
Oh! let her come, with her dark tresses flowing,
All gentle and juvenile, curly and gay,
In the manner of--Ackerman's Dresses for May!


[1] This and the following are extracted from a Work, which may, some time
or other, meet the eye of the Public--entitled "Odes of Horace, done into
English by several Persons of Fashion."

[2] Charles Fox.






HORACE, ODE XXII. LIB. I.

FREELY TRANSLATED BY LORD ELDON.


The man who keeps a conscience pure,
  (If not his own, at least his Prince's,)
Thro' toil and danger walks secure,
  Looks big and black and never winces.

No want has he of sword or dagger,
  Cockt hat or ringlets of Geramb;
Tho' Peers may laugh and Papists swagger,
  He doesnt care one single damn.

Whether midst Irish chairmen going.
  Or thro' St. Giles's alleys dim,
Mid drunken Sheelahs, blasting, blowing,
  No matter, 'tis all one to him.

For instance, I, one evening late,
  Upon a gay vacation sally,
Singing the praise of Church and State,
  Got (God knows how) to Cranbourne Alley.

When lo! an Irish Papist darted
  Across my path, gaunt, grim, and big--
I did but frown and off he started,
  Scared at me even without my wig.

Yet a more fierce and raw-boned dog
  Goes not to Mass in Dublin City,
Nor shakes his brogue o'er Allen's Bog,
  Nor spouts in Catholic Committee.

Oh! place me midst O'Rourkes, O'Tooles,
  The ragged royal-blood of Tara;
Or place me where Dick Martin rules
  The houseless wilds of Connemara;[1]

Of Church and State I'll warble still,
  Though even Dick Martin's self should grumble;
Sweet Church and State, like Jack and Jill,
So lovingly upon a hill--
  Ah! ne'er like Jack and Jill to tumble![2]


[1] I must here remark, that the said Dick Martin being a very good
fellow, it was not at all fair to make a "_malus Jupiter_" of him.

[2] There cannot be imagined a more happy illustration of the
inseparability of Church and State, and their (what is called) "standing
and falling together," than this ancient apologue of Jack and Jill. Jack,
of course, represents the State in this ingenious little Allegory.

    Jack fell down,
    And broke his _Crown_,
  And Jill came tumbling after.






THE NEW COSTUME OF THE MINISTERS.


    --_nova monstra creavit_.
    OVID. "_Metamorph_." 1. i. v. 417.


Having sent off the troops of brave Major Camac,
With a swinging horse-tail at each valorous back.
And such helmets, God bless us! as never deckt any
Male creature before, except Signor Giovanni--
"Let's see," said the Regent (like Titus, perplext
With the duties of empire,) "whom _shall_ I dress next?"

  He looks in the glass--but perfection is there,
Wig, whiskers, and chin-tufts all right to a hair;[1]
Not a single _ex_-curl on his forehead he traces--
For curls are like Ministers, strange as the case is,
The _falser_ they are, the more firm in their places.
His coat he next views--but the coat who could doubt?
For his Yarmouth's own Frenchified hand cut it out;
Every pucker and seam were made matters of state,
And a Grand Household Council was held on each plait.

  Then whom shall he dress? shall he new-rig his brother,
Great Cumberland's Duke, with some kickshaw or other?
And kindly invent him more Christianlike shapes
For his feather-bed neckcloths and pillory capes.
Ah! no--here his ardor would meet with delays,
For the Duke had been lately packt up in new Stays,
So complete for the winter, he saw very plain
'Twould be devilish hard work to _un_pack him again.

  So what's to be done?--there's the Ministers, bless 'em!--
As he _made_ the puppets, why shouldnt he _dress_ 'em?
"An excellent thought!--call the tailors--be nimble--
"Let Cum bring his spy-glass, and Hertford her thimble;
"While Yarmouth shall give us, in spite of all quizzers,
"The last Paris cut with his true Gallic scissors."

  So saying, he calls Castlereagh and the rest
Of his heaven-born statesmen, to come and be drest.
While Yarmouth, with snip-like and brisk expedition,
Cuts up all at once a large Catholic Petition
In long tailors' measures, (the Prince crying "Well-done!")
And first _puts in hand_ my Lord Chancellor Eldon.


[1] That model of Princes, the Emperor Commodus, was particularly
luxurious in the dressing and ornamenting of his hair. His conscience,
however, would not suffer him to trust himself with a barber, and he used,
accordingly, to burn off his beard.






CORRESPONDENCE BETWEEN A LADY AND GENTLEMAN,

UPON THE ADVANTAGE OF (WHAT IS CALLED) "HAVING LAW[1] ON ONE'S SIDE."


_The Gentleman's Proposal_.

      _Legge aurea,
    S'ei piace, ei lice_."

Come fly to these arms nor let beauties so bloomy
  To one frigid owner be tied;
Your prudes may revile and your old ones look gloomy,
  But, dearest, we've _Law_ on our side.

Oh! think the delight of two lovers congenial,
  Whom no dull decorums divide;
Their error how sweet and their raptures how _venial_,
  When once they've got Law on their side.

'Tis a thing that in every King's reign has been done too:
  Then why should it now be decried?
If the Father has done it why shouldnt the Son too?
  For so argues Law on our side.

And even should our sweet violation of duty
  By cold-blooded jurors be tried,
They can _but_ bring it in "misfortune," my beauty,
  As long as we've Law on our side.

_The Lady's Answer_.

Hold, hold, my good Sir, go a little more slowly;
  For grant me so faithless a bride,
Such sinners as we, are a little too _lovely_,
  To hope to have Law on our side.

Had you been a great Prince, to whose star shining o'er 'em
  The People should look for their guide,
Then your Highness (and welcome!) might kick down decorum--
  You'd always have Law on your side.

Were you even an old Marquis, in mischief grown hoary,
  Whose heart tho' it long ago died
To the _pleasures_ of vice, is alive to its _glory_--
  You still would have Law on your side.

But for _you_, Sir, Crim. Con. is a path full of troubles;
  By _my_ advice therefore abide,
And leave the pursuit to those Princes and Nobles
  Who have _such_ a _Law_ on their side.


[1] In allusion to Lord Ellenborough.






OCCASIONAL ADDRESS

FOR THE OPENING OF THE NEW THEATRE OF ST. STEPHEN,

INTENDED TO HAVE BEEN SPOKEN BY THE PROPRIETOR IN FULL COSTUME, ON THE
24TH OF NOVEMBER, 1812.


This day a New House for your edification
We open, most thinking and right-headed nation!
Excuse the materials--tho' rotten and bad,
They're the best that for money just now could be had;
And if _echo_ the charm of such houses should be,
You will find it shall echo my speech to a T.

  As for actors, we've got the old Company yet,
The same motley, odd, tragicomical set;
And considering they all were but clerks t'other day,
It is truly surprising how well they can play.
Our Manager,[1] (he who in Ulster was nurst,
And sung _Erin go Bragh_ for the galleries first,
But on finding _Pitt_-interest a much better thing,
Changed his note of a sudden to _God save the King_,)
Still wise as he's blooming and fat as he's clever,
Himself and his speeches as _lengthy_ as ever.
Here offers you still the full use of his breath,
Your devoted and long-winded proser till death.

  You remember last season, when things went perverse on.
We had to engage (as a block to rehearse on)
One Mr. Vansittart, a good sort of person,
Who's also employed for this season to play,
In "Raising the Wind," and "the Devil to Pay."[2]
We expect too--at least we've been plotting and planning--
To get that great actor from Liverpool, Canning;
And, as at the Circus there's nothing attracts
Like a good _single combat_ brought in 'twixt the acts,
If the Manager should, with the help of Sir Popham,
Get up new _diversions_ and Canning should stop 'em,
Who knows but we'll have to announce in the papers,
"Grand fight--second time--with additional capers."

  Be your taste for the ludicrous, humdrum, or sad,
There is plenty of each in this House to be had.
Where our Manager ruleth, there weeping will be,
For a _dead hand at tragedy_ always was he;
And there never was dealer in dagger and cup,
Who so _smilingly_ got all his tragedies up.
His powers poor Ireland will never forget,
And the widows of Walcheren weep o'er them yet.

  So much for the actors;--for secret machinery,
Traps, and deceptions, and shifting of scenery,
Yarmouth and Cum are the best we can find,
To transact all that trickery business behind.
The former's employed too to teach us French jigs,
Keep the whiskers in curl and look after the wigs.

  In taking my leave now, I've only to say,
A few _Seats in the House_, not as yet sold away,
May be had of the Manager, Pat Castlereagh.


[1] Lord Castlereagh.

[2] He had recently been appointed Chancellor of the Exchequer.






THE SALE OF THE TOOLS.


    _Instrumenta regni_.--TACITUS.


Here's a choice set of Tools for you, Ge'mmen and Ladies,
They'll fit you quite handy, whatever your trade is;
(Except it be _Cabinet-making_;--no doubt,
In that delicate service they're rather worn out;
Tho' their owner, bright youth! if he'd had his own will,
Would have bungled away with them joyously still.)
You see they've been pretty well _hackt_--and alack!
What tool is there job after job will not hack?
Their edge is but dullish it must be confest,
And their temper, like Ellenborough's, none of the best;
But you'll find them good hardworking Tools, upon trying,
Were't but for their _brass_ they are well worth the buying;
They're famous for making _blinds_, _sliders_, and _screens_,
And are some of them excellent _turning_ machines.

  The first Tool I'll put up (they call it a _Chancellor_),
Heavy concern to both purchaser _and_ seller.
Tho' made of pig iron yet worthy of note 'tis,
'Tis ready to _melt_ at a half minute's notice.[1]
Who bids? Gentle buyer! 'twill turn as thou shapest;
'Twill make a good thumb-screw to torture a Papist;
Or else a cramp-iron to stick in the wall
Of some church that old women are fearful will fall;
Or better, perhaps, (for I'm guessing at random,)
A heavy _drag-chain_ for some Lawyer's old _Tandem_.
Will nobody bid? It is cheap, I am sure, Sir--
Once, twice,--going, going,--thrice, gone!--it is yours, Sir.
To pay ready money you sha'n't be distrest,
As a _bill_ at _long date_ suits the Chancellor best.

  Come, where's the next Tool?--
Oh! 'tis here in a trice--
This implement, Ge'mmen, at first was a _Vice_;
(A tenacious and close sort of tool that will let
Nothing out of its grasp it once happens to get;)
But it since has received a new coating of _Tin_,
Bright enough for a Prince to behold himself in.
Come, what shall we say for it? briskly! bid on,
We'll the sooner get rid of it--going--quite gone.
God be with it, such tools, if not quickly knockt down,
Might at last cost their owner--how much? why, a _Crown_!

  The next Tool I'll set up has hardly had handsel or
Trial as yet and is _also_ a Chancellor--
Such dull things as these should be sold by the gross;
Yet, dull as it is, 'twill be found to _shave close_,
And like _other_ close shavers, some courage to gather,
This _blade_ first began by a flourish on _leather_.[2]
You shall have it for nothing--then, marvel with me
At the terrible _tinkering_ work there must be,
Where a Tool such as this is (I'll leave you to judge it)
Is placed by ill luck at the top of _the Budget_!


[1] An allusion to Lord Eldon's lachrymose tendencies.

[2] Of the taxes proposed by Mr. Vansittart, that principally
opposed in Parliament was the additional duty on leather."--_Ann.
Register_.






LITTLE MAN AND LITTLE SOUL.

A BALLAD.

_To the tune of "There was a little man, and he wooed a little
maid."_

DEDICATED TO THE RT. HON. CHARLES ABBOT.


    _arcades ambo et cantare pares_


1813.


There was a little Man and he had a little Soul,
And he said, "Little Soul, let us try, try, try.
  "Whether it's within our reach
  "To make up a little Speech,
"Just between little you and little I, I, I,
  "Just between little you and little I!"

  Then said his little Soul,
    Peeping from her little hole,
"I protest, little Man, you are stout, stout, stout,
    "But, if it's not uncivil,
    "Pray tell me what the devil,
"Must our little, little speech be about, bout, bout,
  "Must our little, little speech be about?"

    The little Man lookt big,
    With the assistance of his wig,
And he called his little Soul to order, order, order,
    Till she feared he'd make her jog in
    To jail, like Thomas Croggan,
(As she wasn't Duke or Earl) to reward her, ward her, ward her,
  As she wasn't Duke or Earl, to reward her.

    The little Man then spoke,
    "Little Soul, it is no joke,
"For as sure as Jacky Fuller loves a sup, sup, sup,
    "I will tell the Prince and People
    "What I think of Church and Steeple.
"And my little patent plan to prop them up, up, up,
  "And my little patent plan to prop them up."

    Away then, cheek by jowl,
    Little Man and little Soul
Went and spoke their little speech to a tittle, tittle, tittle,
    And the world all declare
    That this priggish little pair
Never yet in all their lives lookt so little, little, little.
  Never yet in all their lives lookt so little!






REINFORCEMENTS FOR LORD WELLINGTON.


    _suosque tibi commendat, Troja Penates hos cape fatorum comites_.
    VERGIL.


1813.


As recruits in these times are not easily got
And the Marshal _must_ have them--pray, why should we not,
As the last and, I grant it, the worst of our loans to him,
Ship off the Ministry, body and bones to him?
There's not in all England, I'd venture to swear,
Any men we could half so conveniently spare;
And tho' they've been helping the French for years past,
We may thus make them useful to England at last.
Castlereagh in our sieges might save some disgraces,
Being used to the _taking_ and _keeping_ of _places_;
And Volunteer Canning, still ready for joining,
Might show off his talent for sly _under-mining_.
Could the Household but spare us its glory and pride,
Old Headfort at _horn-works_ again might be tried,
And as Chief Justice make a _bold charge_ at his side:
While Vansittart could victual the troops _upon tick_,
And the Doctor look after the baggage and sick.

  Nay, I do not see why the great Regent himself
Should in times such as these stay at home on the shelf:
Tho' thro' narrow defiles he's not fitted to pass,
Yet who could resist, if he bore down _en masse_?
And tho' oft of an evening perhaps he might prove,
Like our Spanish confederates, "unable to move,"[1]
Yet there's _one_ thing in war of advantage unbounded,
Which is, that he could not with ease be _surrounded_.

 In my next I shall sing of their arms and equipment:
At present no more, but--good luck to the shipment!


[1] The character given to the Spanish soldier, in Sir John
Murray's memorable despatch.






HORACE, ODE I. LIB. III.

A FRAGMENT.


    _odi profanum, valgus et arceo;
    favete linguis: carmina non prius
         audila Musarum sacerdos
          virginibus puerisque canto.
    regum timendorum in proprios greges,
    reges in ipsos imperium est Jovis_.


1813.


I hate thee, oh, Mob, as my Lady hates delf;
  To Sir Francis I'll give up thy claps and thy hisses,
Leave old Magna Charta to shift for itself,
  And, like Godwin, write books for young masters and misses.
Oh! it _is_ not high rank that can make the heart merry,
  Even monarchs themselves are not free from mishap:
Tho' the Lords of Westphalia must quake before Jerry,
  Poor Jerry himself has to quake before Nap.






HORACE, ODE XXXVIII. LIB. I.

A FRAGMENT.


    _persico odi, puer, adparatus;
    displicent nexae philyra coronae;_
    mitte sectari, _Rosa_ quo locorum
      sera moretur.


TRANSLATED BY A TREASURY CLERK, WHILE WAITING DINNER FOR THE RIGHT HON.
GEORGE ROBE.


Boy, tell the Cook that I hate all nicknackeries.
Fricassees, vol-au-vents, puffs, and gim-crackeries--
Six by the Horse-Guards!--old Georgy is late--
But come--lay the table-cloth--zounds! do not wait,
Nor stop to inquire, while the dinner is staying,
At which of his places Old Rose is delaying!

       *       *       *       *       *






IMPROMPTU.

UPON BEING OBLIGED TO LEAVE A PLEASANT PARTY, FROM THE WANT OF A PAIR OF
BREECHES TO DRESS FOR DINNER IN.

1810.


Between Adam and me the great difference is,
  Tho' a paradise each has been forced to resign,
That he never wore breeches, till turned out of his,
  While for want of my breeches, I'm banisht from mine.






LORD WELLINGTON AND THE MINISTERS.

1813.


So gently in peace Alcibiades smiled,
  While in battle he shone forth so terribly grand,
That the emblem they graved on his seal, was a child
  With a thunderbolt placed in its innocent hand.

Oh Wellington, long as such Ministers wield
Your magnificent arm, the same emblem will do;
For while _they_'re in the Council and _you_ in the Field.
We've the _babies_ in _them_, and the _thunder_ in   _you_!




The following trifles, having enjoyed in their circulation through the
newspapers all the celebrity and length of life to which they were
entitled, would have been suffered to pass quietly into oblivion without
pretending to any further distinction, had they not already been
published, in a collective form, both in London and Paris, and, in each
case, been mixed up with a number of other productions, to which, whatever
may be their merit, the author of the following pages has no claim. A
natural desire to separate his own property, worthless as it is, from that
of others, is, he begs to say, the chief motive of the publication of this
volume.






TO SIR HUDSON LOWE.


    _effare causam nominis,
    utrumne mores hoc tui
    nomen dedere, an nomen hoc
    secuta morum regula_. AUSONIUS.


1816.


  Sir Hudson Lowe, Sir Hudson _Low_,
(By name, and ah! by nature so)
  As thou art fond of persecutions,
Perhaps thou'st read, or heard repeated,
How Captain Gulliver was treated,
  When thrown among the Lilliputians.

They tied him down--these little men did--
And having valiantly ascended
  Upon the Mighty Man's protuberance,
They did so strut!--upon my soul,
It must have been extremely droll
  To see their pigmy pride's exuberance!

And how the doughty mannikins
Amused themselves with sticking pins
  And needles in the great man's breeches:
And how some _very_ little things,
That past for Lords, on scaffoldings
  Got up and worried him with speeches,

Alas, alas! that it should happen
To mighty men to be caught napping!--
  Tho' different too these persecutions;
For Gulliver, _there_, took the nap,
While, _here_, the _Nap_, oh sad mishap,
  Is taken by the Lilliputians!






AMATORY COLLOQUY BETWEEN BANK AND GOVERNMENT.

1826.


BANK.

Is all then forgotten? those amorous pranks
  You and I in our youth, my dear Government, played;
When you called me the fondest, the truest of Banks,
  And enjoyed the endearing _advances_ I made!

When left to ourselves, unmolested and free,
  To do all that a dashing young couple should do,
A law against _paying_ was laid upon me,
  But none against _owing_, dear helpmate, on you.

And is it then vanisht?--that "hour (as Othello
  So happily calls it) of Love and _Direction_?"
And must we, like other fond doves, my dear fellow,
  Grow good in our old age and cut the connection?

GOVERNMENT.

Even so, my beloved Mrs. Bank, it must be;
  This paying in cash plays the devil with wooing:
We've both had our swing, but I plainly foresee
  There must soon be a stop to our _bill_ing and cooing.

Propagation in reason--a small child or two--
  Even Reverend Malthus himself is a friend to;
The issue of some folks is moderate and few--
  But _ours_, my dear corporate Bank, there's no end to!

So--hard tho' it be on a pair, who've already
  Disposed of so many pounds, shillings and pence;
And in spite of that pink of prosperity, Freddy,[1]
  So lavish of cash and so sparing of sense--

The day is at hand, my Papyria[2] Venus,
  When--high as we once used to carry our capers--
Those soft _billet-doux_ we're now passing between us,
  Will serve but to keep Mrs. Coutts in curl-papers:

And when--if we _still_ must continue our love,
  (After all that has past)--our amour, it is clear,
Like that which Miss Dane managed with Jove,
  Must all be transacted in _bullion_, my dear!

_February, 1826_.


[1] Honorable Fredrick Robinson.

[2] So called, to distinguish her from the Aure or _Golden_ Venus.






DIALOGUE BETWEEN A SOVEREIGN AND A ONE POUND NOTE.


    _"o ego non felix, quam tu fugis, ut pavet acres
    agna lupos, capreaeque leones."_--HOR.


    Said a Sovereign to a Note,
    In the pocket of his coat,
Where they met in a neat purse of leather,
    "How happens it, I prithee,
    "That, tho' I'm wedded _with_ thee,
"Fair Pound, we can never live together?

    "Like your sex, fond of _change_
    "With Silver you can range,
"And of lots of young sixpences be mother;
    "While with _me_--upon my word,
    "Not my Lady and my Lord
"Of Westmouth see so little of each other!"

    The indignant Note replied
    (Lying crumpled by his side),
"Shame, shame, it is _yourself_ that roam, Sir--
    "One cannot look askance,
    "But, whip! you're off to France,
"Leaving nothing but old rags at home, Sir.

    "Your scampering began
    "From the moment Parson Van,
"Poor man, made us _one_ in Love's fetter;
    "'For better or for worse'
    "Is the usual marriage curse,
"But ours is all 'worse' and no 'better.'

    "In vain are laws past,
    "There's nothing holds you fast,
"Tho' you know, sweet Sovereign, I adore you--
    "At the smallest hint in life,
    "You forsake your lawful wife,
"As _other_ Sovereigns did before you.

    "I flirt with Silver, true--
    "But what can ladies do,
"When disowned by their natural protectors?
    "And as to falsehood, stuff!
    "I shall soon be _false_ enough,
"When I get among those wicked Bank Directors."

    The Sovereign, smiling on her,
    Now swore upon his honor,
To be henceforth domestic and loyal;
    But, within an hour or two,
    Why--I sold him to a Jew,
And he's now at No. 10, Palais Royal.






AN EXPOSTULATION TO LORD KING.


    _"quem das finem, rex magne, laborum?"_
    VERGIL.


1826.


How _can_ you, my Lord, thus delight to torment all
  The Peers of the realm about cheapening their corn,[1]
When you know, if one hasn't a very high rental,
  'Tis hardly worth while being very high born?

Why bore them so rudely, each night of your life,
  On a question, my Lord, there's so much to abhor in?
A question-like asking one, "How is your wife?"--
  At once so confounded _domestic_ and _foreign_.

As to weavers, no matter how poorly they feast;
  But Peers and such animals, fed up for show,
(Like the well-physickt elephant, lately deceased,)
  Take a wonderful quantum of cramming, you know.

You might see, my dear Baron, how bored and distrest
  Were their high noble hearts by your merciless tale,
When the force of the agony wrung even a jest
  From the frugal Scotch wit of my Lord Lauderdale![2]

Bright Peer! to whom Nature and Berwickshire gave
  A humor endowed with effects so provoking,
That when the whole House looks unusually grave
  You may always conclude that Lord Lauderdale's joking!

And then, those unfortunate weavers of Perth--
  Not to know the vast difference Providence dooms
Between weavers of Perth and Peers of high birth,
  'Twixt those who have _heir_looms, and those who've but looms!

"To talk _now_ of starving!"--as great Athol said[3]--
  (And the nobles all cheered and the bishops all wondered,)
"When some years ago he and others had fed
  "Of these same hungry devils about fifteen hundred!"

It follows from hence--and the Duke's very words
  Should be publisht wherever poor rogues of this craft are--
That weavers, _once_ rescued from starving by Lords,
  Are bound to be starved by said Lords ever after.

When Rome was uproarious, her knowing patricians
  Made "Bread and the Circus" a cure for each _row_;
But not so the plan of _our_ noble physicians,
  "No Bread and the Treadmill,"'s the regimen now.

So cease, my dear Baron of Ockham, your prose,
  As I shall my poetry--_neither_ convinces;
And all we have spoken and written but shows,
  When you tread on a nobleman's _corn_,[4]
how he winces.


[1] See the proceedings of the Lords, Wednesday, March 1, 1826,
when Lord King was severely reproved by several of the noble Peers, for
making so many speeches against the Corn Laws.

[2] This noble Earl said, that "when he heard the petition came
from ladies' boot and shoe-makers, he thought it must be against the
'corns' which they inflicted on the fair sex."

[3] The Duke of Athol said, that "at a former period, when these
weavers were in great distress, the landed interest of Perth had supported
1500 of them, it was a poor return for these very men now to petition
against the persons who had fed them."

[4] An improvement, we flatter ourselves, on Lord L.'s joke.






THE SINKING FUND CRIED.


    "Now what, we ask, is become of this Sinking Fund--these eight
    millions of surplus above expenditure, which were to reduce the
    interest of the national debt by the amount of four hundred thousand
    pounds annually? Where, indeed, is the Sinking Fund itself?"
    --_The Times_.


    Take your bell, take your bell,
    Good Crier, and tell
To the Bulls and the Bears, till their ears are stunned,
    That, lost or stolen,
    Or fallen thro' a hole in
The Treasury floor, is the Sinking Fund!

    O yes! O yes!
    Can anybody guess
What the deuce has become of this Treasury wonder?
    It has Pitt's name on't,
    All brass, in the front,
And Robinson's scrawled with a goose-quill under.

    Folks well knew what
    Would soon be its lot,
When Frederick and Jenky set hob-nobbing,[1]
    And said to each other,
    "Suppose, dear brother,
"We make this funny old Fund worth robbing."

    We are come, alas!
    To a very pretty pass--
Eight Hundred Millions of score, to pay,

    With but Five in the till,
    To discharge the bill,
And even that Five, too, whipt away!

    Stop thief! stop thief!--
    From the Sub to the Chief,
These _Gemmen_ of Finance are plundering cattle--
    Call the watch--call Brougham,
    Tell Joseph Hume,
That best of Charleys, to spring his rattle.

    Whoever will bring
    This aforesaid thing
To the well-known House of Robinson and Jenkin,
    Shall be paid, with thanks,
    In the notes of banks,
Whose Funds have all learned "the Art of Sinking."

    O yes! O yes!
    Can anybody guess
What the devil has become of this Treasury wonder?
    It has Pitt's name on't,
    All brass, in the front,
And Robinson's, scrawled with a goose-quill under.


[1] In 1824, when the Sinking Fund was raised by the imposition of new
taxes to the sum of five millions.






ODE TO THE GODDESS CERES.

BY SIR THOMAS LETHBRIDGE.


    "legiferoe Cereri Phoeboque."--VERGIL.


Dear Goddess of Corn whom the ancients, we know,
  (Among other odd whims of those comical bodies,)
Adorned with somniferous poppies to show
  Thou wert always a true Country-gentleman's Goddess.

Behold in his best shooting-jacket before thee
  An eloquent 'Squire, who most humbly beseeches.
Great Queen of Mark-lane (if the thing doesnt bore thee),
  Thou'lt read o'er the last of his--_never_-last speeches.

Ah! Ceres, thou knowest not the slander and scorn
  Now heapt upon England's 'Squirearchy, so boasted;
Improving on Hunt,[1] 'tis no longer the Corn,
  'Tis the _growers_ of Corn that are now, alas! roasted.

In speeches, in books, in all shapes they attack us--
  Reviewers, economists--fellows no doubt
That you, my dear Ceres and Venus and Bacchus
  And Gods of high fashion, know little about.

There's Bentham, whose English is all his own making,--
  Who thinks just as little of settling a nation
As he would of smoking his pipe or of taking
  (What he himself calls) his "postprandial vibration."[2]

There are two Mr. Mills to whom those that love reading
  Thro' all that's unreadable call very clever;--
And whereas Mill Senior makes war on _good_ breeding,
  Mill Junior makes war on all _breeding_ whatever!

In short, my dear Goddess, old England's divided
  Between _ultra_ blockheads and superfine sages;--
With _which_ of these classes we landlords have sided
  Thou'lt find in my Speech if thou'lt read a few pages.

For therein I've proved to my own satisfaction
  And that of all 'Squires I've the honor of meeting
That 'tis the most senseless and foul-mouthed detraction
  To say that poor people are fond of cheap eating.

On the contrary, such the "_chaste_ notions"[3] of food
  That dwell in each pale manufacturer's heart,
They would scorn any law, be it ever so good,
  That would make thee, dear Goddess, less dear than thou art!

And, oh! for Monopoly what a blest day,
  Whom the Land and the Silk[4] shall in fond combination
(Like _Sulky_ and _Silky_, that pair in the play,)[5]
  Cry out with one voice for High Rents and Starvation!

Long life to the Minister!--no matter who,
  Or how dull he may be, if with dignified spirit he
Keeps the ports shut--and the people's mouths too--
  We shall all have a long run of Freddy's prosperity,

And, as for myself, who've, like Hannibal, sworn
  To hate the whole crew who would take our rents from us,
Had England but _One_ to stand by thee, Dear Corn,
  That last, honest Uni-Corn[6] would be Sir Thomas!


[1] A sort of "breakfast-power," composed of roasted corn, was
about this time introduced by Mr. Hunt, as a substitute for coffee.

[2] The venerable Jeremy's phrase for his after-dinner walk.

[3] A phrase in one of Sir Thomas's last speeches.

[4] Great efforts were, at that time, making for the exclusion of
foreign silk.

[5] "Road to Ruin."

[6] This is meant not so much for a pun, as in allusion to the natural
history of the Unicorn, which is supposed to be, something between the
_Bos_ and the _Asinus_, and, as Rees's Cyclopaedia assures us,
has a particular liking for everything "chaste."






A HYMN OF WELCOME AFTER THE RECESS.


    _"animas sapientiores fieri quiescendo."_


And now-cross-buns and pancakes o'er--
Hail, Lords and Gentlemen, once more!
  Thrice hail and welcome, Houses Twain!
The short eclipse of April-Day
Having (God grant it!) past away,
  Collective Wisdom, shine again!

Come, Ayes and Noes, thro' thick and thin,--
With Paddy Holmes for whipper-in,--
  Whate'er the job, prepared to back it;
Come, voters of Supplies--bestowers
Of jackets upon trumpet-blowers,
  At eighty mortal pounds the jacket![1]

Come--free, at length, from Joint-Stock cares--
Ye Senators of many Shares,
  Whose dreams of premium knew no boundary;
So fond of aught like _Company_,
That you would even have taken _tea_
  (Had you been askt) with Mr. Goundry.[2]

Come, matchless country-gentlemen;
Come, wise Sir Thomas--wisest then
  When creeds and corn-lords are debated;
Come, rival even the Harlot Red,
And show how wholly into _bread_
  A 'Squire is _transubstantiated_,

Come, Lauderdale, and tell the world,
That--surely as thy scratch is curled
  As never scratch was curled before--
Cheap eating does more harm than good,
And working-people spoiled by food,
  The less they eat, will work the more.

Come, Goulburn, with thy glib defence
(Which thou'dst have made for Peter's Pence)
  Of Church-rates, worthy of a halter;
Two pipes of port (_old_ port, 'twas said
By honest _New_port)[3] bought and paid
  By Papists for the Orange Altar![4]

Come, Horton, with thy plan so merry
For peopling Canada from Kerry--
  Not so much rendering Ireland quiet,
As grafting on the dull Canadians
That liveliest of earth's contagions,
  The _bull_-pock of Hibernian riot!

Come all, in short, ye wondrous men
Of wit and wisdom, come again;
  Tho' short your absence, all deplore it--
Oh, come and show, whate'er men say,
That you can _after_ April-Day,
  Be just as--sapient as _before_ it.


[1] An item of expense which Mr. Hume in vain endeavored tog et rid of:--
trumpeters, it appears like the men of All-Souls, must be "_bene
vestiti_."

[2] The gentleman, lately before the public, who kept his _Joint_-Stock
Tea Company all to himself, singing "Te _solo adoro_."

[3] Sir John Newport.

[4] This charge of two pipes of port for the sacramental wine is a
precious specimen of the sort of rates levied upon their Catholic fellow-
parishioners by the Irish Protestants. "The thirst that from the soul doth
rise Doth ask a drink divine."






MEMORABILIA OF LAST WEEK.

MONDAY, MARCH 13, 1826.


The Budget--quite charming and witty--no hearing,
For plaudits and laughs, the good things that were in it;--
Great comfort to find, tho' the speech isn't _cheering_,
  That all its gay auditors _were_ every minute.

What, _still_ more prosperity!--mercy upon us,
  "This boy'll be the death of me"--oft as, already,
Such smooth Budgeteers have genteelly undone us,
  For _Ruin made easy_ there's no one like Freddy.

TUESDAY.

Much grave apprehension exprest by the Peers,
  Lest--calling to life the old Peachums and Lockitts--
The large stock of gold we're to have in three years,
  Should all find its way into highwaymen's pockets![1]

WEDNESDAY.

Little doing--for sacred, oh Wednesday, thou art
  To the seven-o'-clock joys of full many a table--
When _the Members_ all meet, to make much of that part,
  With which they so rashly fell out in the Fable.

It appeared, tho', to-night, that--as church-wardens yearly,
  Eat up a small baby--those cormorant sinners.
The Bankrupt Commissioners, _bolt_ very nearly
  A moderate-sized bankrupt, _tout chaud_, for their dinners![2]

_Nota bene_--a rumor to-day, in the city,
"Mr. Robinson just has resigned"--what a pity!

The Bulls and the Bears all fell a sobbing,
When they heard of the fate of poor Cock _Robin_:
While thus, to the nursery tune, so pretty,
A murmuring _Stock_-dove breathed her ditty:--

Alas, poor _Robin_, he crowed as long
  And as sweet as a prosperous Cock could crow;
But his _note_ was _small_ and the _gold_-finch's song
  Was a pitch too high for Robin to go.
        Who'll make his shroud?

"I," said the Bank, "tho' he played me a prank,
  "While I have a rag, poor _Rob_ shall be rolled in't,
"With many a pound I'll paper him round,
  "Like a plump rouleau--_without_ the gold in it."


[1] "Another objection to a metallic currency was, that it produced a
greater number of highway robberies."--_Debate in the Lords_.

[2] Mr. Abercromby's statement of the enormous tavern bills of the
Commissioners of Bankrupts.






ALL IN THE FAMILY WAY.

A NEW PASTORAL BALLAD.

(SUNG IN THE CHARACTER OF BRITANNIA.)


    "The Public Debt is due from ourselves to ourselves, and resolves
    itself into a Family Account."--_Sir Robert Peel's Letter_.


Tune--_My banks are all furnisht with bees_.


My banks are all furnisht with rags,
  So thick, even Freddy can't thin 'em;
I've torn up my old money-bags,
  Having little or nought to put in 'em.
My tradesmen are smashing by dozens,
  But this is all nothing, they say;
For bankrupts since Adam are cousins,--
  So, it's all in the family way.

My Debt not a penny takes from me.
  As sages the matter explain;--
Bob owes it to Tom, and then Tommy
  Just owes it to Bob back again.
Since all have thus taken to _owing_,
  There's nobody left that can _pay_;
And this is the way to keep going,--
  All quite in the family way.

My senators vote away millions,
  To put in Prosperity's budget;
And tho' it were billions or trillions,
  The generous rogues wouldnt grudge it.
'Tis all but a family _hop_,
  'Twas Pitt began dancing the hay;
Hands round!--why the deuce should we stop?
  'Tis all in the family way.

My laborers used to eat mutton,
  As any great man of the State does;
And now the poor devils are put on
  Small rations of tea and potatoes.
But cheer up, John, Sawney, and Paddy,
  The King is your father, they say;
So even if you starve for your Daddy,
  'Tis all in the family way.

My rich manufacturers tumble,
  My poor ones have nothing to chew;
And even if themselves do not grumble
  Their stomachs undoubtedly do.
But coolly to fast _en famille_,
  Is as good for the soul as to pray;
And famine itself is genteel,
  When one starves in a family way.

I have found out a secret for Freddy,
  A secret for next Budget day;
Tho' perhaps he may know it already,
  As he too's a sage in his way.
When next for the Treasury scene he
  Announces "the Devil to pay,"
Let him write on the bills, "_nota bene_,
  "'Tis all in the family way."






BALLAD FOR THE CAMBRIDGE ELECTION.


    "I authorized my Committee to take the step which they did, of
    proposing a fair comparison of strength, upon the understanding that
    _whichever of the two should prove to be the weakest_, should
    give way to the other."
    --_Extract from Mr. W. J. Bankes's Letter to Mr. Goulbourn_.


Bankes is weak, and Goulbourn too,
  No one e'er the fact denied;--
Which is "weakest" of the two,
  Cambridge can alone decide.
Choose between them, Cambridge, pray,
Which is weakest, Cambridge, say.

Goulbourn of the Pope afraid is,
  Bankes, as much afraid as he;
Never yet did two old ladies
  On this point so well agree.
Choose between them, Cambridge, pray,
Which is weakest. Cambridge, say.

Each a different mode pursues,
  Each the same conclusion reaches;
Bankes is foolish in Reviews,
  Goulbourn foolish in his speeches.
Choose between them, Cambridge, pray,
Which is weakest, Cambridge, say.

Each a different foe doth damn,
  When his own affairs have gone ill;
Bankes he damneth Buckingham,
  Goulbourn damneth Dan O'Connell.
Choose between them, Cambridge, pray,
Which is weakest, Cambridge, say.
Once we know a horse's neigh
  Fixt the election to a throne,
So whichever first shall _bray_
  Choose him, Cambridge, for thy own.
Choose him, choose him by his bray,
Thus elect him, Cambridge, pray.

_June_, 1826.






MR. ROGER DODSWORTH.

1826.


TO THE EDITOR OF THE TIMES.

Sir--Having just heard of the wonderful resurrection of Mr. Roger
Dodsworth from under an _avalanche_, where he had remained, _bien
frappe_, it seems, for the last 166 years, I hasten to impart to you a
few reflections on the subject.--Yours, etc.

    _Laudator Temporis Acti_.


What a lucky turn-up!--just as Eldon's withdrawing,
  To find thus a gentleman, frozen in the year
Sixteen hundred and sixty, who only wants thawing
  To serve for _our_ times quite as well as the Peer;--

To bring thus to light, not the Wisdom alone
  Of our Ancestors, such as 'tis found on our shelves,
But in perfect condition, full-wigged and full-grown,
  To shovel up one of those wise bucks themselves!

Oh thaw Mr. Dodsworth and send him safe home--
  Let him learn nothing useful or new on the way;
With his wisdom kept snug from the light let him come,
  And our Tories will hail him with "Hear!" and "Hurrah!"

What a God-send to _them_!--a good, obsolete man,
  Who has never of Locke or Voltaire been a reader;--
Oh thaw Mr. Dodsworth as fast as you can,
  And the Lonsdales and Hertfords shall choose him for leader.

Yes, Sleeper of Ages, thou _shalt_ be their chosen;
  And deeply with thee will they sorrow, good men,
To think that all Europe has, since thou wert frozen,
  So altered thou hardly wilt know it again.

And Eldon will weep o'er each sad innovation
  Such oceans of tears, thou wilt fancy that he
Has been also laid up in a long congelation,
  And is only now thawing, dear Roger, like thee.






COPY OF AN INTERCEPTED DESPATCH.

FROM HIS EXCELLENCY DON STREPITOSO DIABOLO, ENVOY EXTRAORDINARY TO HIS
SATANIC MAJESTY.

St. James's Street, July 1, 1826.


Great Sir, having just had the good luck to catch
  An official young demon, preparing to go,
Ready booted and spurred, with a black-leg despatch
  From the Hell here at Crockford's, to _our_ Hell below--

I write these few lines to your Highness Satanic,
  To say that first having obeyed your directions
And done all the mischief I could in "the Panic,"
  My next special care was to help the Elections.

Well knowing how dear were those times to thy soul,
  When every good Christian tormented his brother,
And caused, in thy realm, such a saving of coal,
  From all coming down, ready grilled by each other;

Remembering besides how it pained thee to part
  With the old Penal Code--that _chef-d'oeuvre_ of Law,
In which (tho' to own it too modest thou art)
  We could plainly perceive the fine touch of thy claw;

I thought, as we ne'er can those good times revive,
  (Tho' Eldon, with help from your Highness would try,)
'Twould still keep a taste for Hell's music alive,
  Could we get up a thundering No-Popery cry;--

That yell which when chorused by laics and clerics,
  So like is to _ours_, in its spirit and tone.
That I often nigh laugh myself into hysterics,
  To think that Religion should make it her own.

So, having sent down for the original notes
  Of the chorus as sung by your Majesty's choir
With a few pints of lava to gargle the throats
  Of myself and some others who sing it "with fire,"[1]

Thought I, "if the Marseillais Hymn could command
  "Such audience, tho' yelled by a _Sans-culotte_ crew
"What wonders shall _we_ do, who've men in our band,
  "That not only wear breeches but petticoats too."

Such _then_ were my hopes, but with sorrow, your Highness,
  I'm forced to confess--be the cause what it will,
Whether fewness of voices or hoarseness or shyness,--
  Our Beelzebub Chorus has gone off but ill.

The truth is no placeman now knows his right key,
  The Treasury pitch-pipe of late is so various;
And certain _base_ voices, that lookt for a fee
  At the _York_ music-meeting now think it precarious.

Even some of our Reverends _might_ have been warmer,--
  Tho' one or two capital roarers we've had;
Doctor Wise[2]is for instance a charming performer,
  And _Huntingdon_ Maberley's yell was not bad!

Altogether however the thing was not hearty;--
  Even Eldon allows we got on but so so;
And when next we attempt a No-Popery party,
  We _must_, please your Highness, recruit _from below_.

But hark! the young Black-leg is cracking his whip--
  Excuse me, Great Sir-there's no time to be civil;--
The next opportunity shan't be let slip,
  But, till then,
    I'm, in haste, your most dutiful
      DEVIL.

  _July, 1826_


[1] _Con fuoco_--a music-book direction.

[2] This reverend gentleman distinguished himself at the Reading election.






THE MILLENNIUM.

SUGGESTED BY THE LATE WORK OF THE REVEREND MR. IRVING "ON PROPHECY."

1826


A millennium at hand!--I'm delighted to hear it--
  As matters both public and private now go,
With multitudes round us all starving or near it.
  A good, rich Millennium will come _-propos_.

Only think, Master Fred, what delight to behold,
  Instead of thy bankrupt old City of Rags,
A bran-new Jerusalem built all of gold,
  Sound bullion throughout from the roof to the flags--

A City where wine and cheap corn[1] shall abound--
  A celestial _Cocaigne_ on whose buttery shelves
We may swear the best things of this world will be found,
  As your Saints seldom fail to take care of themselves!

Thanks, reverend expounder of raptures Elysian,
  Divine Squintifobus who, placed within reach
Of two opposite worlds, by a twist of your vision
  Can cast at the same time a sly look at each;--

Thanks, thanks for the hope thou affordest, that we
  May even in our own times a Jubilee share.
Which so long has been promist by prophets like thee,
  And so often postponed, we began to despair.

There was Whiston[2] who learnedly took Prince Eugene
  For the man who must bring the Millennium about;
There's Faber whose pious productions have been
  All belied ere his book's first edition was out;--

There was Counsellor Dobbs, too, an Irish M. P.,
  Who discoursed on the subject with signal _eclat_,
And, each day of his life sat expecting to see
  A Millennium break out in the town of Armagh![3]

There was also--but why should I burden my lay
  With your Brotherses, Southcotes, and names less deserving,
When all past Millenniums henceforth must give way
  To the last new Millennium of Orator Irving.

Go on, mighty man,--doom them all to the shelf,--
  And when next thou with Prophecy troublest thy sconce,
Oh forget not, I pray thee, to prove that thyself
  Art the Beast (Chapter iv.) that sees nine ways at once.


[1] "A measure of wheat for a penny, and three measures of barley
for a penny."--Rev. vi.

[2] When Whiston presented to Prince Eugene the Essay in which he
attempted to connect his victories over the Turks with Revelation, the
Prince is said to have replied, that "he was not aware he had ever had
ever had honor of being known to St. John".

[3] Mr. Dobbs was a member of the Irish Parliament, and, on all other
subjects but the Millennium, a very sensible person: he chose Armagh as
the scene of his Millennium on account of the name Armageddon mentioned in
Revelation.






THE THREE DOCTORS.


    _doctoribus loetamur tribus_.


1826.


Tho' many great Doctors there be,
  There are three that all Doctors out-top,
Doctor Eady, that famous M. D.,
  Doctor Southey, and dear Doctor Slop.[1]

The purger, the proser, the bard--
  All quacks in a different style;
Doctor Southey writes books by the yard.
  Doctor Eady writes puffs by the mile![2]

Doctor Slop, in no merit outdone
  By his scribbling or physicking brother,
Can dose us with stuff like the one.
  Ay, and _doze_ us with stuff like the other.

Doctor Eady good company keeps
  With "No Popery" scribes, on the walls;
Doctor Southey as gloriously sleeps
  With "No Popery" scribes on the stalls.

Doctor Slop, upon subjects divine,
  Such bedlamite slaver lets drop,
Taat if Eady should take the _mad_ line,
  He'll be sure of a patient in Slop.

Seven millions of Papists, no less,
  Doctor Southey attacks, like a Turk;
Doctor Eady, less bold, I confess,
  Attacks but his maid-of-all-work

Doctor Southey, for _his_ grand attack,
  Both a laureate and pensioner is;
While poor Doctor Eady, alack,
  Has been _had up_ to Bow-street for his!

And truly, the law does so blunder,
  That tho' little blood has been spilt, he
May probably suffer as, under
  The _Chalking_ Act, _known_ to be guilty.

So much for the merits sublime
  (With whose catalogue ne'er should I stop)
Of the three greatest lights of our time,
  Doctor Eady and Southey and Slop!

Should you ask me, to _which_ of the three
  Great Doctors the preference should fall,
As a matter of course I agree
  Doctor Eady must go to _the wall_.

But as Southey with laurels is crowned,
  And Slop with a wig and a tail is,
Let Eady's bright temples be bound
  With a swingeing "Corona _Muralis_!"[3]


[1] The editor of the Morning Herald, so nicknamed.

[2] Alluding to the display of this doctor's name, in chalk, on all the
walls round the metropolis.

[3] A crown granted as a reward among the Romans to persons who performed
any extraordinary exploits upon wall, such as scaling them, battering
them, etc.--No doubt, writing upon them, to the extent Dr. Eady does,
would equally establish a claim to the honor.






EPITAPH ON A TUFT-HUNTER.


Lament, lament, Sir Isaac Heard,
  Put mourning round thy page, Debrett,
For here lies one who ne'er preferred
  A Viscount to a Marquis yet.

Beside him place the God of Wit,
  Before him Beauty's rosiest girls,
Apollo for a _star_ he'd quit,
  And Love's own sister for an Earl's.

Did niggard fate no peers afford,
  He took of course to peers' relations;
And rather than not sport a Lord
  Put up with even the last creations;

Even Irish names could he but tag 'em
  With "Lord" and "Duke," were sweet to call;
And at a pinch Lord Ballyraggum
  Was better than no Lord at all.

Heaven grant him now some noble nook,
  For rest his soul! he'd rather be
Genteelly damned beside a Duke,
  Than saved in vulgar company.






ODE TO A HAT.


    --_altum aedificat caput_."
    JUVENAL

1826.


Hail, reverent Hat!--sublime mid all
  The minor felts that round thee grovel;--
Thou that the Gods "a Delta" call
  While meaner mortals call the "shovel."
When on thy shape (like pyramid,
  Cut horizontally in two)[1]
I raptured gaze, what dreams unbid
  Of stalls and mitres bless my view!

That brim of brims so sleekly good--
  Not flapt, like dull Wesleyans', down,
But looking (as all churchmen's should)
  Devoutly upward--towards the _crown_.

Gods! when I gaze upon that brim,
  So redolent of Church all over,
What swarms of Tithes in vision dim,--
Some-pig-tailed, some like cherubim,
  With ducklings' wings--around it hover!
Tenths of all dead and living things,
That Nature into being brings,
From calves and corn to chitterlings.

Say, holy Hat, that hast, of cocks,
The very cock most orthodox.
To _which_ of all the well-fed throng
Of Zion,[2] joy'st thou to belong?
Thou'rt _not_ Sir Harcourt Lees's--no-
  For hats grow like the heads that wear 'em:
And hats, on heads like his, would grow
  Particularly _harum-scarum_.

Who knows but thou mayst deck the pate
Of that famed Doctor Ad-mth-te,
(The reverend rat, whom we saw stand
On his hind-legs in Westmoreland,)
Who changed so quick from _blue_ to _yellow_,
  And would from _yellow_ back to _blue_,
And back again, convenient fellow,
  If 'twere his interest so to do.

Or haply smartest of triangles,
  Thou art the hat of Doctor Owen;
The hat that, to his vestry wrangles,
  That venerable priest doth go in,--
And then and there amid the stare
Of all St. Olave's, takes the chair
And quotes with phiz right orthodox
  The example of his reverend brothers,
To prove that priests all fleece their flocks
  And _he_ must fleece as well as others.

Blest Hat! (whoe'er thy lord may be)
Thus low I take off mine to thee,
The homage of a layman's _castor_,
To the spruce _delta_ of his pastor.
Oh mayst thou be, as thou proceedest,
  Still smarter cockt, still brusht the brighter,
Till, bowing all the way, thou leadest
  Thy sleek possessor to a mitre!


[1] So described by a Reverend Historian of the Church:--"A Delta hat like
the horizontal section of a pyramid."--GRANT'S "History of the English
Church."

[2] Archbishop Magee affectionately calls the Church Establishment of
Ireland "the little Zion."






NEWS FOR COUNTRY COUSINS.


Dear Coz, as I know neither you nor Miss Draper,
When Parliament's up, ever take in a paper,
But trust for your news to such stray odds and ends
As you chance to pick up from political friends-
Being one of this well-informed class, I sit down
To transmit you the last newest news that's in town.

As to Greece and Lord Cochrane, things couldn't look better--
His Lordship (who promises now to fight faster)
Has just taken Rhodes and despatched off a letter
To Daniel O'Connell, to make him Grand Master;
Engaging to change the old name, if he can,
From the Knights of St. John to the Knights of St. Dan;--
Or if Dan should prefer (as a still better whim)
Being made the Colossus, 'tis all one to him.

From Russia the last accounts are that the Tsar--
Most generous and kind as all sovereigns are,
And whose first princely act (as you know, I suppose)
Was to give away all his late brother's old clothes[1]--
Is now busy collecting with brotherly care
The late Emperor's nightcaps, and thinks, of bestowing
One nightcap apiece (if he has them to spare)
On all the distinguisht old ladies now going.
(While I write, an arrival from Riga--the "Brothers"--
Having nightcaps on board for Lord Eldon and others.)

Last advices from India--Sir Archy, 'tis thought,
Was near catching a Tartar (the first ever caught
In N. Lat. 2l.)--and his Highness Burmese,
Being very hard prest to shell out the rupees,
And not having rhino sufficient, they say, meant
To pawn his august Golden Foot[2] for the payment.

(How lucky for monarchs, that thus when they choose
Can establish a _running_ account with the Jews!)
The security being what Rothschild calls "goot,"
A loan will be shortly, of course, set _on foot_;
The parties are Rothschild, A. Baring and Co.
With three other great pawnbrokers: each takes a toe,
And engages (lest Gold-foot should give us _leg_-bail,
As he did once before) to pay down _on the nail_.

       *       *       *       *       *

This is all for the present--what vile pens and paper!
Yours truly, dear Cousin--best love to Miss Draper.

_September_, 1826.


[1] A distribution was made of the Emperor Alexander's military wardrobe
by his successor.

[2] This potentate styles himself the Monarch of the Golden foot.






A VISION.

BY THE AUTHOR OF "CHRISTABEL."


"Up!" said the Spirit and ere I could pray
One hasty orison, whirled me away
To a Limbo, lying--I wist not where--
Above or below, in earth or air;
For it glimmered o'er with a _doubtful_ light,
One couldn't say whether 'twas day or night;
And 'twas crost by many a mazy track,
One didn't know how to get on or back;
And I felt like a needle that's going astray
(With its _one_ eye out) thro' a bundle of hay;
When the Spirit he grinned, and whispered me,
"Thou'rt now in the Court of Chancery!"

Around me flitted unnumbered swarms
Of shapeless, bodiless, tailless forms;
(Like bottled-up babes that grace the room
Of that worthy knight, Sir Everard Home)--
All of them, things half-killed in rearing;
Some were lame--some wanted _hearing_;
Some had thro' half a century run,
Tho' they hadn't a leg to stand upon.
Others, more merry, as just beginning,
Around on a _point of law_ were spinning;
Or balanced aloft, 'twixt _Bill_ and _Answer_,
Lead at each end, like a tight-rope dancer.
Some were so _cross_ that nothing could please 'em;-
Some gulpt down _affidavits_ to ease 'em--
All were in motion, yet never a one,
Let it _move_ as it might, could ever move _on_,
"These," said the Spirit, "you plainly see,
"Are what they call suits in Chancery!"

I heard a loud screaming of old and young,
Like a chorus by fifty Vellutis sung;
Or an Irish Dump ("the words by Moore ")
At an amateur concert screamed in score;--
So harsh on my ear that wailing fell
Of the wretches who in this Limbo dwell!
It seemed like the dismal symphony
Of the shapes' Aeneas in hell did see;
Or those frogs whose legs a barbarous cook
Cut off and left the frogs in the brook,
To cry all night, till life's last dregs,
"Give us our legs!--give us our legs!"
Touched with the sad and sorrowful scene,
I askt what all this yell might mean,
When the Spirit replied, with a grin of glee,
"'Tis the cry of the Suitors in Chancery!"

I lookt and I saw a wizard rise,[1]
With a wig like a cloud before men's eyes.
In his aged hand he held a wand,
Wherewith he beckoned his embryo band,
And they moved and moved as he waved it o'er,
But they never get on one inch the more.
And still they kept limping to and fro,
Like Ariels round old Prospero--
Saying, "Dear Master, let us go,"
But still old Prospero answered "No."
And I heard the while that wizard elf
Muttering, muttering spells to himself,
While o'er as many old papers he turned,
As Hume e'er moved for or Omar burned.
He talkt of his virtue--"tho' some, less nice,
(He owned with a sigh) preferred his _Vice_"--
And he said, "I think"--"I doubt"--"I hope,"
Called God to witness, and damned the Pope;
With many more sleights of tongue and hand
I couldn't for the soul of me understand.
Amazed and posed, I was just about
To ask his name, when the screams without,
The merciless clack of the imps within,
And that conjuror's mutterings, made such a din,
That, startled, I woke--leapt up in my bed--
Found the Spirit, the imps, and the conjuror fled,
And blest my stars, right pleased to see,
That I wasn't as yet in Chancery.


[1] The Lord Chancellor Eldon.






THE PETITION OF THE ORANGEMEN OF IRELAND.

1826.


To the people of England, the humble Petition
  Of Ireland's disconsolate Orangemen, showing--
That sad, very sad, is our present condition;--
  Our jobbing all gone and our noble selves going;--

That forming one seventh, within a few fractions,
  Of Ireland's seven millions of hot heads and hearts,
We hold it the basest of all base transactions
  To keep us from murdering the other six parts;--

That as to laws made for the good of the many,
  We humbly suggest there is nothing less true;
As all human laws (and our own, more than any)
  Are made _by_ and _for_ a particular few:--

That much it delights every true Orange brother
  To see you in England such ardor evince,
In discussing _which_ sect most tormented the other,
  And burned with most _gusto_ some hundred years since;--

That we love to behold, while old England grows faint,
  Messrs. Southey and Butler nigh coming to blows,
To decide whether Dunstan, that strong-bodied Saint,
  Ever truly and really pulled the De'il's nose;

Whether t'other Saint, Dominic, burnt the De'il's paw--
  Whether Edwy intrigued with Elgiva's odd mother--
And many such points, from which Southey can draw
  Conclusions most apt for our hating each other.

That 'tis very well known this devout Irish nation
  Has now for some ages, gone happily on
Believing in two kinds of Substantiation,
  One party in _Trans_ and the other in _Con_;[1]

That we, your petitioning _Cons_, have in right
  Of the said monosyllable ravaged the lands
And embezzled the goods and annoyed, day and night,
  Both the bodies and souls of the sticklers for _Trans_;--

That we trust to Peel, Eldon, and other such sages,
  For keeping us still in the same state of mind;
Pretty much as the world used to be in those ages,
  When still smaller syllables maddened mankind;--

When the words _ex_ and _per_[2] served as well to annoy
  One's neighbors and friends with, as _con_ and _trans_ now;
And Christians, like Southey, who stickled for _oi_,
  Cut the throats of all Christians who stickled for _ou_.[3]

That relying on England whose kindness already
  So often has helpt us to play this game o'er,
We have got our red coats and our carabines ready,
  And wait but the word to show sport as before.

That as to the expense--the few millions or so,
  Which for all such diversions John Bull has to pay--
'Tis at least a great comfort to John Bull to know
  That to Orangemen's pockets 'twill all find its way.
For which your petitioners ever will pray,
        Etc., etc., etc., etc., etc.


[1] Consubstantiation--the true Reformed belief; at least, the belief of
Luther, and, as Mosheim asserts, of Melancthon also.

[2] When John of Ragusa went to Constantinople (at the time this dispute
between "_ex_" and "_per_" was going on), he found the Turks, we
are told, "laughing at the Christians for being divided by two such
insignificant particles."

[3] The Arian controversy.--Before that time, says Hooker, "in order to be
a sound believing Christian, men were not curious what syllables or
particles of speech they used."






COTTON AND CORN.

A DIALOGUE.


Said Cotton to Corn, t'other day,
  As they met and exchanged a salute--
(Squire Corn in his carriage so gay,
  Poor Cotton half famished on foot):

"Great Squire, if it isn't uncivil
  "To hint at starvation before you,
"Look down on a poor hungry devil,
  "And give him some bread, I implore you!"

Quoth Corn then in answer to Cotton,
  Perceiving he meant to make _free_--
"Low fellow, you've surely forgotten
  "The distance between you and me!

"To expect that we Peers of high birth
  "Should waste our illustrious acres,
"For no other purpose on earth
  "Than to fatten curst calico-makers!--

"That Bishops to bobbins should bend--
  "Should stoop from their Bench's sublimity,
"Great dealers in _lawn_, to befriend
  "Such contemptible dealers in dimity!

"No--vile Manufacture! ne'er harbor
  "A hope to be fed at our boards;--
"Base offspring of Arkwright the barber,
  "What claim canst _thou_ have upon Lords?

"No--thanks to the taxes and debt,
  "And the triumph of paper o'er guineas,
"Our race of Lord Jemmys, as yet,
  "May defy your whole rabble of _Jennys_!"

So saying--whip, crack, and away
  Went Corn in his chaise thro' the throng,
So headlong, I heard them all say,
  "Squire Corn will be _down_ before long."






THE CANONIZATION OF SAINT BUTTERWORTH.


    "A Christian of the best edition."--RABELAIS.


Canonize him!--yea, verily, we'll canonize him,
  Tho' Cant is his hobby and meddling his bliss,
Tho' sages may pity and wits may despise him,
  He'll ne'er make a bit the worse Saint for all this.

Descend, all ye Spirits, that ever yet spread
  The dominion of Humbug o'er land and o'er sea,
Descend on our Butterworth's biblical head,
  Thrice-Great, Bibliopolist, Saint, and M. P.

Come, shade of Joanna, come down from thy sphere.
  And bring little Shiloh--if 'tisn't too far--
Such a sight will to Butterworth's bosom be dear,
  _His_ conceptions and _thine_ being much on a par.

Nor blush, Saint Joanna, once more to behold
  A world thou hast honored by cheating so many;
Thou'lt find still among us one Personage old,
  Who also by tricks and the _Seals_[1] makes a penny.

Thou, too, of the Shakers, divine Mother Lee![2]
  Thy smiles to beatified Butterworth deign;
Two "lights of the Gentiles" are thou, Anne, and he,
  _One_ hallowing Fleet Street, and _t'other_ Toad Lane![3]

The heathen, we know, made their Gods out of wood,
  And Saints may be framed of as handy materials;--
Old women and Butterworths make just as good
As any the Pope ever _bookt_ as Ethereals.

Stand forth, Man of Bibles!--not Mahomet's pigeon,
  When perched on the Koran, he dropt there, they say,
Strong marks of his faith, ever shed o'er religion
  Such glory as Butterworth sheds every day.

Great Galen of souls, with what vigor he crams
  Down Erin's idolatrous throats, till they crack again,
Bolus on bolus, good man!--and then damns
  Both their stomachs and souls, if they dare cast them back again.

How well might his shop--as a type representing
  The creed of himself and his sanctified clan--
On its counter exhibit "the Art of Tormenting,"
  Bound neatly, and lettered "Whole Duty of Man!"

Canonize him!--by Judas, we _will_ canonize him;
  For Cant is his hobby and twaddling his bliss;
And tho' wise men may pity and wits may despise him,
  He'll make but the better _shop_-saint for all this.

Call quickly together the whole tribe of Canters,
  Convoke all the _serious_ Tag-rag of the nation;
Bring Shakers and Snufflers and Jumpers and Ranters
  To witness their Butterworth's Canonization!

Yea, humbly I've ventured his merits to paint,
  Yea, feebly have tried all his gifts to portray,
And they form a sum-total for making a Saint.
  That the Devil's own advocate could not gainsay.

Jump high, all ye Jumpers, ye Ranters all roar,
  While Butterworth's spirit, upraised from your eyes,
Like a kite made of foolscap, in glory shall soar,
  With a long tail of rubbish behind, to the skies!


[1] A great part of the income of Joanna Southcott arose from the Seals of
the Lord's protection which she sold to her followers.

[2] Mrs. Anne Lee, the "chosen vessel" of the Shakers, and "Mother of all
the children of regeneration."

[3] Toad Lane, in Manchester, where Mother Lee was born.  In her "Address
to Young Believers," she says, that "it is a matter of no importance with
them from whence the means of their deliverance come, whether from a
stable in Bethlehem, or from Toad Lane, Manchester."






AN INCANTATION.

SUNG BY THE BUBBLE SPIRIT.


Air.--_Come with me, and we will go
         Where the rocks of coral grow_.


Come with me and we will blow
Lots of bubbles as we go;
Bubbles bright as ever Hope
Drew from fancy--or from soap;
Bright as e'er the South Sea sent
From its frothy element!
Come with me and we will blow
Lots of bubbles as we go.
Mix the lather, Johnny Wilks,
Thou, who rhym'st so well to bilks;[1]
Mix the lather--who can be
Fitter for such tasks than thee,
Great M. P. for _Suds_bury!

Now the frothy charm is ripe,
Puffing Peter,[2] bring thy pipe,--
Thou whom ancient Coventry
Once so dearly loved that she
Knew not which to her was sweeter,
Peeping Tom or Puffing Peter;--
Puff the bubbles high in air,
Puff thy best to keep them there.

Bravo, bravo, Peter More!
Now the rainbow humbugs[3] soar.
Glittering all with golden hues
Such as haunt the dreams of Jews;--
Some reflecting mines that lie
Under Chili's glowing sky,
Some, those virgin pearls that sleep
Cloistered in the southern deep;
Others, as if lent a ray
From the streaming Milky Way,
Glistening o'er with curds and whey
From the cows of Alderney.

Now's the moment--who shall first
Catch the bubbles ere they burst?
Run, ye Squires, ye Viscounts, run,
Brogden, Teynham, Palmerston;--
John Wilks junior runs beside ye!
Take the good the knaves provide ye!
See, with upturned eyes and hands,
Where the _Share_man, Brogden, stands,
Gaping for the froth to fall
Down his gullet--_lye_ and all.
See!--

    But, hark, my time is out--
Now, like some great water-spout,
Scattered by the cannon's thunder,
Burst ye bubbles, all asunder!

[_Here the stage darkens--a discordant crash is heard from the orchestra
--the broken bubbles descend in a saponaceous but uncleanly mist over the
heads of the_ Dramatis Personae_, and the scene drops, leaving the
bubble-hunters--all in the suds_.]


[1] Strong indications of character may be sometimes traced in the rhymes
to names. Marvell thought so when he wrote "Sir Edward Button, The foolish
Knight who rhymes to mutton."

[2] The member, during a long period, for Coventry.

[3] An humble imitation of one of our modern poets, who, in a poem against
War, after describing the splendid habiliments of the soldier, thus
apostrophizes him--"thou rainbow ruffian!"






A DREAM OF TURTLE.

BY SIR W. CURTIS.

1826.


'Twas evening time, in the twilight sweet
I sailed along, when--whom should I meet
But a Turtle journeying o'er the sea,
"On the service of his Majesty."[1]
When spying him first thro' twilight dim,
I didn't know what to make of him;
But said to myself, as slow he plied
His fins and rolled from side to side
Conceitedly o'er the watery path--
"'Tis my Lord of Stowell taking a bath,
"And I hear him now, among the fishes,
"Quoting Vatel and Burgersdicius!"
But, no--'twas, indeed, a Turtle wide
And plump as ever these eyes descried;
A turtle juicy as ever yet
Glued up the lips of a Baronet!
And much did it grieve my soul to see
That an animal of such dignity,
Like an absentee abroad should roam,
When he _ought_ to stay and be ate at home.

But now "a change came o'er my dream,"
  Like the magic lantern's shifting slider;
I lookt and saw by the evening beam
  On the back of that Turtle sat a rider--
A goodly man with an eye so merry,
I knew 'twas our Foreign Secretary,[2]
Who there at his ease did sit and smile,
Like Waterton on his crocodile;[3]
Cracking such jokes, at every motion,
  As made the Turtle squeak with glee
And own they gave him a lively notion
  Of what his _forced_-meat balls would be.
So, on the Sec. in his glory went.
Over that briny element,
Waving his hand as he took farewell
With graceful air, and bidding me tell
Inquiring friends that the Turtle and he
Were gone on a foreign embassy--
To soften the heart of a _Diplomat_,
Who is known to dote upon verdant fat,
And to let admiring Europe see,
That _calipash_ and _calipee_
Are the English forms of Diplomacy.


[1] We are told that the passport of this grand diplomatic Turtle (sent by
the Secretary for Foreign Affairs to a certain noble envoy) described him
as "on his majesty's service."

[2] Mr. Canning.

[3] _Wanderings in South America_. "It was the first and last time [says
Mr. Waterton] I was ever on a crocodile's back."






THE DONKEY AND HIS PANNIERS.

A FABLE.


    --_"fessus jam sudat asellus,
    "parce illi; vestrum delicium est asinus."_
    VERGIL. _Copa_.


A donkey whose talent for burdens was wondrous,
  So much that you'd swear he rejoiced in a load,
One day had to jog under panniers so ponderous,
  That--down the poor Donkey fell smack on the road!

His owners and drivers stood round in amaze
  What! Neddy, the patient, the prosperous Neddy,
So easy to drive thro' the dirtiest ways
  For every description of job-work so ready!

One driver (whom Ned might have "hailed" as a "brother")[1]
  Had just been proclaiming his Donkey's renown
For vigor, for spirit, for one thing or other--
  When, lo! mid his praises the Donkey came down!
But how to upraise him?--_one_ shouts, _t'other_ whistles,
  While Jenky, the Conjuror, wisest of all,
Declared that an "over-production of thistles[2]--
  (Here Ned gave a stare)--was the cause of his fall."

Another wise Solomon cries as he passes--
  "There, let him alone and the fit will soon cease;
"The beast has been fighting with other jack-asses,
  "And this is his mode of '_transition to peace_.'"

Some lookt at his hoofs, and with learned grimaces
  Pronounced that too long without shoes he had gone--
"Let the blacksmith provide him a _sound metal basis_,"
  (The wise-acres said), "and he's sure to jog on."

Meanwhile, the poor Neddy in torture and fear
  Lay under his panniers, scarce able to groan;
And--what was still dolefuller--lending an ear
  To advisers whose ears were a match for his own.

At length a plain rustic whose wit went so far
  As to see others' folly, roared out, as he past--
"Quick--off with the panniers, all dolts as ye are,
  "Or your prosperous Neddy will soon kick his last!"

October, 1826.


[1] Alluding to an early poem of Mr. Coleridge's, addressed to an Ass, and
beginning, "I hail thee, brother!"

[2] A certain country gentleman having said in the House, "that we must
return at last to the food of our ancestors," somebody asked Mr. T. "what
food the gentleman meant?"--"Thistles, I suppose," answered Mr. T.






ODE TO THE SUBLIME PORTE.

1826.


Great Sultan, how wise are thy state compositions!
  And oh! above all I admire that Decree,
In which thou command'st that all _she_ politicians
  Shall forthwith be strangled and cast in the sea.

'Tis my fortune to know a lean Benthamite spinster--
  A maid who her faith in old Jeremy puts,
Who talks with a lisp of "the last new West_minster_,"
  And hopes you're delighted with "Mill upon Gluts;"

Who tells you how clever one Mr. Funblank is,
  How charming his Articles 'gainst the Nobility;--
And assures you that even a gentleman's rank is
  In Jeremy's school, of no sort of _utility_.

To see her, ye Gods, a new Number perusing--
  ART. 1.--"On the _Needle's_ variations," by Pl--ce;[1]
  ART. 2.--By her Favorite Funblank[2]--"so amusing!
  "Dear man! he makes Poetry quite a _Law_ case."

ART. 3.--"Upon Fallacies," Jeremy's own--
  (Chief Fallacy being his hope to find readers);-
ART. 4.--"Upon Honesty," author unknown;--
  ART. 5.--(by the young Mr. Mill) "Hints to Breeders."

Oh, Sultan, oh, Sultan, tho' oft for the bag
  And the bowstring, like thee, I am tempted to call--
Tho' drowning's too good for each blue-stocking hag,
  I would bag this _she_ Benthamite first of them all!

And lest she should ever again lift her head
  From the watery bottom, her clack to renew--
As a clog, as a sinker, far better than lead,
  I would hang around her neck her own darling Review.


[1] A celebrated political tailor.

[2] This pains-taking gentleman has been at the trouble of counting, with
the assistance of Cocker, the number of metaphors in Moore's "_Life of
Sheridan_," and has found them to amount, as nearly as possible, to 2235--
and some _fractions_.






CORN AND CATHOLICS.


    _utrum horum
    dirius_ borun? _Incerti Auctoris_.


What! _still_ those two infernal questions,
  That with our meals our slumbers mix--
That spoil our tempers and digestions--
  Eternal Corn and Catholics!

Gods! were there ever two such bores?
  Nothing else talkt of night or morn--
Nothing _in_ doors or _out_ of doors,
  But endless Catholics and Corn!

Never was such a brace of pests--
  While Ministers, still worse than either,
Skilled but in feathering their nests,
  Plague us with both and settle neither.

So addled in my cranium meet
  Popery and Corn that oft I doubt,
Whether, this year, 'twas bonded Wheat,
  Or bonded Papists, they let out.

_Here_, landlords, _here_ polemics nail you,
  Armed with all rubbish they can rake up;
_Prices_ and _Texts_ at once assail you--
  From Daniel _these_, and _those_ from Jacob,

And when you sleep, with head still torn
  Between the two, their shapes you mix,
Till sometimes Catholics seem Corn--
  Then Corn again seems Catholics.

Now Dantsic wheat before you floats--
  Now Jesuits from California--
Now Ceres linkt with Titus _Oats_,
  Comes dancing thro' the "Porta _Corn_ea."[1]

Oft too the Corn grows animate,
  And a whole crop of heads appears,
Like Papists, _bearding_ Church and State--
  Themselves, together _by the ears_!

In short these torments never cease,
  And oft I wish myself transferred off
To some far, lonely land of peace
  Where Corn or Papists ne'er were heard of.

Yes, waft me, Parry, to the Pole;
  For--if my fate is to be chosen
'Twixt bores and icebergs--on my soul,
  I'd rather, of the two, be frozen!


[1] The Horn Gate, through which the ancients supposed all true
dreams (such as those of the Popish Plot, etc.) to pass.






A CASE OF LIBEL.


    "The greater the truth, the worse the libel."


A certain Sprite, who dwells below,
  ('Twere a libel perhaps to mention where,)
Came up _incog_. some years ago
  To try for a change the London air.

So well he lookt and drest and talkt,
  And hid his tail and horns so handy,
You'd hardly have known him as he walkt
  From C----e, or any other Dandy.

(His horns, it seems, are made to unscrew;
  So he has but to take them out of the socket,
And--just as some fine husbands do--
  Conveniently clap them into his pocket.)

In short, he lookt extremely natty,
  And even contrived--to his own great wonder--
By dint of sundry scents from Gattie,
  To keep the sulphurous _hogo_ under.

And so my gentleman hoofed about,
  Unknown to all but a chosen few
At White's and Crockford's, where no doubt
  He had many _post-obits_ falling due.

Alike a gamester and a wit,
  At night he was seen with Crockford's crew,
At morn with learned dames would sit--
  So past his time 'twixt _black_ and _blue_.

Some wisht to make him an M. P.,
  But, finding Wilks was also one, he
Swore, in a rage, "he'd be damned, if he
  "Would ever sit in one house with Johnny."

At length as secrets travel fast,
  And devils, whether he or she,
Are sure to be found out at last,
  The affair got wind most rapidly.

The Press, the impartial Press, that snubs
  Alike a fiend's or an angel's capers--
Miss Paton's soon as Beelzebub's,
  Fired off a squib in the morning papers:

"We warn good men to keep aloof
  "From a grim old Dandy seen about
"With a fire-proof wig and a cloven hoof
  "Thro' a neat-cut Hoby smoking out."

Now,--the Devil being gentleman,
  Who piques himself on well-bred dealings,--
You may guess, when o'er these lines he ran,
  How much they hurt and shockt his feelings.

Away he posts to a Man of Law,
  And 'twould make you laugh could you have seen 'em,
As paw shook hand, and hand shook paw,
  And 'twas "hail, good fellow, well met," between 'em.

Straight an indictment was preferred--
  And much the Devil enjoyed the jest,
When, asking about the Bench, he heard
  That, of all the Judges, his own was _Best_.[1]

In vain Defendant proffered proof
  That Plaintiff's self was the Father of Evil--
Brought Hoby forth to swear to the hoof
  And Stultz to speak to the tail of the Devil.

The Jury (saints, all snug and rich,
  And readers of virtuous Sunday papers)
Found for the Plaintiff--on hearing which
  The Devil gave one of his loftiest capers.

For oh, 'twas nuts to the Father of Lies
  (As this wily fiend is named in the Bible)
To find it settled by laws so wise,
  That the greater the truth, the worse the libel!


[1] A celebrated Judge, so named.






LITERARY ADVERTISEMENT.


Wanted--Authors of all-work to job for the season,
  No matter which party, so faithful to neither;
Good hacks who, if posed for a rhyme or a reason.
  Can manage, like ******, to do without either.

If in jail, all the better for out-o'-door topics;
  Your jail is for travellers a charming retreat;
They can take a day's rule for a trip to the Tropics,
  And sail round the world at their ease in the Fleet.

For a dramatist too the most useful of schools--
  He can study high life in the King's Bench community;
Aristotle could scarce keep him more _within rules_,
  And of _place_ he at least must adhere to the _unity_.

Any lady or gentleman, come to an age
  To have good "Reminiscences" (three-score or higher)
Will meet with encouragement--so much, _per_ page,
  And the spelling and grammar both found by the buyer.

No matter with _what_ their remembrance is stockt,
  So they'll only remember the _quantum_ desired;--
Enough to fill handsomely Two Volumes, _oct_.,
  Price twenty-four shillings, is all that's required.

They may treat us, like Kelly, with old _jeu-d'esprits_,
  Like Dibdin, may tell of each farcical frolic;
Or kindly inform us, like Madame Genlis,[1]
  That gingerbread-cakes always give them the colic.

Wanted also a new stock of Pamphlets on Corn
  By "Farmers" and "Landholders"--(worthies whose lands
Enclosed all in bow-pots their attics adorn,
  Or whose share of the soil maybe seen on their hands).

No-Popery Sermons, in ever so dull a vein,
  Sure of a market;--should they too who pen 'em
Be renegade Papists, like Murtagh O'Sullivan,[2]
  Something _extra_ allowed for the additional venom.

Funds, Physics, Corn, Poetry, Boxing, Romance,
  All excellent subjects for turning a penny;--
To write upon _all_ is an author's sole chance
  For attaining, at last, the least knowledge of _any_.

Nine times out of ten, if his _title_ is good,
  The material _within_ of small consequence is;--
Let him only write fine, and, if not understood,
  Why--that's the concern of the reader, not his.

_Nota Bene_--an Essay, now printing, to show,
  That Horace (as clearly as words could express it)
Was for taxing the Fund-holders, ages ago,
  When he wrote thus--"Quodcunque _in Fund is, assess it."_


[1] This lady also favors us, in her Memoirs, with the address of those
apothecaries, who have, from time to time, given her pills that agreed
with her; always desiring that the pills should be ordered "_comme pour
elle_."

[2] A gentleman, who distinguished himself by his evidence before the
Irish Committees.






THE IRISH SLAVE.[1]

1827.


I heard as I lay, a wailing sound,
  "He is dead--he is dead," the rumor flew;
And I raised my chain and turned me round,
  And askt, thro' the dungeon-window, "Who?"

I saw my livid tormentors pass;
  Their grief 'twas bliss to hear and see!
For never came joy to them alas!
  That didn't bring deadly bane to me.

Eager I lookt thro' the mist of night,
  And askt, "What foe of my race hath died?
"Is it he--that Doubter of law and right,
  "Whom nothing but wrong could e'er decide--

"Who, long as he sees but wealth to win,
  "Hath never yet felt a qualm or doubt
"What suitors for justice he'd keep in,
  "Or what suitors for freedom he'd shut out--

"Who, a clog for ever on Truth's advance,
  "Hangs round her (like the Old Man of the Sea
"Round Sinbad's neck[2]), nor leaves a chance
  "Of shaking him off--is't he? is't he?"

Ghastly my grim tormentors smiled,
  And thrusting me back to my den of woe,
With a laughter even more fierce and wild
  Than their funeral howling, answered "No."

But the cry still pierced my prison-gate,
  And again I askt, "What scourge is gone?
"Is it he--that Chief, so coldly great,
  "Whom Fame unwillingly shines upon--

"Whose name is one of the ill-omened words
  "They link with hate on his native plains;
"And why?--they lent him hearts and swords,
  "And he in return gave scoffs and chains!

"Is it he? is it he?" I loud inquired,
  When, hark!--there sounded a Royal knell;
And I knew what spirit had just expired,
  And slave as I was my triumph fell.

He had pledged a hate unto me and mine,
  He had left to the future nor hope nor choice,
But sealed that hate with a Name Divine,
  And he now was dead and--I _couldn't_ rejoice!

He had fanned afresh the burning brands
  Of a bigotry waxing cold and dim;
He had armed anew my torturers' hands,
  And _them_ did I curse--but sighed for him.

For, _his_ was the error of head not heart;
  And--oh! how beyond the ambushed foe,
Who to enmity adds the traitor's part,
  And carries a smile with a curse below!

If ever a heart made bright amends
  For the fatal fault of an erring head--
Go, learn _his_ fame from the lips of friends,
  In the orphan's tear be his glory read.

A Prince without pride, a man without guile,
  To the last unchanging, warm, sincere,
For Worth he had ever a hand and smile,
  And for Misery ever his purse and tear.

Touched to the heart by that solemn toll,
  I calmly sunk in my chains again;
While, still as I said, "Heaven rest his soul!"
  My mates of the dungeon sighed "Amen!"

January, 1827.


[1] Written on the death of the Duke of York.

[2] "You fell, said they, into the hands of the Old Man of the Sea, and
are the first who ever escaped strangling by his malicious
tricks."--_Story of Sinbad_.






ODE TO FERDINAND.

1827.


Quit the sword, thou King of men,
Grasp the needle once again;
Making petticoats is far
Safer sport than making war;
Trimming is a better thing,
Than the _being_ trimmed, oh King!
Grasp the needle bright with which
Thou didst for the Virgin stitch
Garment, such as ne'er before
Monarch stitched or Virgin wore,
Not for her, oh semster nimble!
Do I now invoke thy thimble;
Not for her thy wanted aid is,
But for certain grave old ladies,
Who now sit in England's cabinet,
Waiting to be clothed in tabinet,
Or whatever choice _toffe_ is
Fit for Dowagers in office.
First, thy care, oh King, devote
To Dame Eldon's petticoat.
Make it of that silk whose dye
Shifts for ever to the eye,
Just as if it hardly knew
Whether to be pink or blue.
Or--material fitter yet--
If thou couldst a remnant get
Of that stuff with which, of old,
Sage Penelope, we're told,
Still by doing and undoing,
Kept her _suitors_ always wooing--
That's the stuff which I pronounce, is
Fittest for Dame Eldon's flounces.

After this, we'll try thy hand,
Mantua-making Ferdinand,
For old Goody Westmoreland;
One who loves, like Mother Cole,
Church and State with all her soul;
And has past her life in frolics
Worthy of our Apostolics.
Choose, in dressing this old flirt,
Something that won't show the dirt,
As, from habit, every minute
Goody Westmoreland is in it.

This is all I now shall ask,
Hie thee, monarch, to thy task;
Finish Eldon's frills and borders,
Then return for further orders.
Oh what progress for our sake,
Kings in millinery make!
Ribands, garters, and such things,
Are supplied by _other_ Kings--
Ferdinand his rank denotes
By providing petticoats.






HAT _VERSUS_ WIG.

1827.


    "At the interment of the Duke of York, Lord Eldon, in order to guard
    against the effects of the damp, stood upon his hat during the whole
    of the ceremony."


     --_metus omnes et inexorabile fatum
    subjecit pedibus, strepitumque Acherontis
    avari_.


'Twixt Eldon's Hat and Eldon's Wig
  There lately rose an altercation,--
Each with its own importance big,
  Disputing _which_ most serves the nation.

Quoth Wig, with consequential air,
  "Pooh! pooh! you surely can't design,
"My worthy beaver, to compare
  "Your station in the state with mine.

"Who meets the learned legal crew?
  "Who fronts the lordly Senate's pride?
"The Wig, the Wig, my friend--while you
  "Hang dangling on some peg outside.

"Oh! 'tis the Wig, that rules, like Love,
  "Senate and Court, with like _clat_--
"And wards below and lords above,
  "For Law is Wig and Wig is Law!

"Who tried the long, _Long_ WELLESLEY suit,
  "Which tried one's patience, in return?
"Not thou, oh Hat!--tho' _couldst_ thou do't,
  "Of other _brims_[1] than thine thou'dst learn.

"'Twas mine our master's toil to share;
  "When, like 'Truepenny,' in the play,[2]
"He, every minute, cried out 'Swear,'
  "And merrily to swear went they;--[3]

"When, loath poor WELLESLEY to condemn, he
  "With nice discrimination weighed,
"Whether 'twas only 'Hell and Jemmy,'
  Or 'Hell and Tommy' that he played.

"No, no, my worthy beaver, no--
  "Tho' cheapened at the cheapest hatter's,
"And smart enough as beavers go
  "Thou ne'er wert made for public matters."

Here Wig concluded his oration,
  Looking, as wigs do, wondrous wise;
While thus, full cockt for declamation,
  The veteran Hat enraged replies:--

"Ha! dost thou then so soon forget
  "What thou, what England owes to me?
"Ungrateful Wig!--when will a debt,
  "So deep, so vast, be owed thee?

"Think of that night, that fearful night,
  "When, thro' the steaming vault below,
"Our master dared, in gout's despite,
  "To venture his podagric toe!

"Who was it then, thou boaster, say
  "When thou hadst to thy box sneaked off,
"Beneath his feet protecting lay,
  "And saved him from a mortal cough?

"Think, if Catarrh had quenched that sun,
  "How blank this world had been to thee!
"Without that head to shine upon,
  "Oh Wig, where would thy glory be?

"You, too, ye Britons,--had this hope
  "Of Church and State been ravisht from ye,
"Oh think, how Canning and the Pope
  "Would then have played up 'Hell and Tommy'!

"At sea, there's but a plank, they say,
  "'Twixt seamen and annihilation;
"A Hat, that awful moment, lay
  "'Twixt England and Emancipation!

"Oh!!!--"

At this "Oh!!!" _The Times_ Reporter
  Was taken poorly, and retired;
Which made him cut Hat's rhetoric shorter,
  Than justice to the case required.

On his return, he found these shocks
  Of eloquence all ended quite;
And Wig lay snoring in his box,
  And Hat was--hung up for the night.


[1] "_Brim_--a naughty woman."--GROSE.

[2]"_Ghost_[beneath].--Swear!
"_Hamlet_.--Ha, ha! say'st thou so!
Art thou there, Truepenny? Come on."

[3] His Lordship's demand for fresh affidavits was incessant.






THE PERIWINKLES AND THE LOCUSTS.

A SALMAGUNDIAN HYMN.


    "To Panurge was assigned the Laird-ship of Salmagundi, which was
    yearly worth 6,789,106,789 ryals besides the revenue of the
    _Locusts_ and _Periwinkles_, amounting one year with another
    to the value of 2,485,768," etc.--RABELAIS.


"Hurra! hurra!" I heard them say,
And they cheered and shouted all the way,
As the Laird of Salmagundi went.
To open in state his Parliament.

The Salmagundians once were rich,
Or thought they were--no matter which--
For, every year, the Revenue
From their Periwinkles larger grew;
And their rulers, skilled in all the trick
And legerdemain of arithmetic,
Knew how to place 1, 2, 3, 4,
  5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 and 10,
Such various ways, behind, before,
That they made a unit seem a score,
  And proved themselves most wealthy men!
So, on they went, a prosperous crew,
  The people wise, the rulers clever--
And God help those, like me and you,
Who dared to doubt (as some now do)
That the Periwinkle Revenue
  Would thus go flourishing on for ever.

"Hurra! hurra!" I heard them say,
And they cheered and shouted all the way,
As the Great Panurge in glory went
To open his own dear Parliament.

But folks at length began to doubt
What all this conjuring was about;
For, every day, more deep in debt
They saw their wealthy rulers get:--
"Let's look (said they) the items thro'
"And see if what we're told be true
"Of our Periwinkle Revenue,"
But, lord! they found there wasn't a tittle
  Of truth in aught they heard before;
For they gained by Periwinkles little
  And lost by Locusts ten times more!
These Locusts are a lordly breed
Some Salmagundians love to feed.
Of all the beasts that ever were born,
Your Locust most delights in _corn_;
And tho' his body be but small,
To fatten him takes the devil and all!
"Oh fie! oh fie!" was now the cry,
As they saw the gaudy show go by,
As the Laird of Salmagundi went
To open his Locust Parliament!






NEW CREATION OF PEERS.

BATCH THE FIRST.


    "His 'prentice han'
    He tried on man,
    And then he made the lasses."


1827.


"And now," quoth the Minister, (eased of his panics,
  And ripe for each pastime the summer affords,)
"Having had our full swing at destroying mechanics,
  "By way of _set-off_, let us make a few Lords.

"'Tis pleasant--while nothing but mercantile fractures,
  "Some simple, some _compound_, is dinned in our ears--
"To think that, tho' robbed all coarse manufactures,
  "We still have our fine manufacture of Peers;--

"Those _Gotielin_ productions which Kings take a pride
  "In engrossing the whole fabrication and trade of;
"Choice tapestry things very grand on _one_ side,
  "But showing, on t'other, what rags they are made of.

The plan being fixt, raw material was sought,--
  No matter how middling, if Tory the creed be;
And first, to begin with, Squire W---, 'twas thought,
  For a Lord was as raw a material as need be.

Next came with his _penchant_ for painting and pelf
  The tasteful Sir Charles,[1] so renowned far and near
For purchasing pictures and selling himself--
  And _both_ (as the public well knows) very dear.

Beside him Sir John comes, with equal _clat_, in;--
  Stand forth, chosen pair, while for titles we measure ye;
Both connoisseur baronets, both fond of _drawing_,
  Sir John, after nature, Sir Charles, on the Treasury.

But, bless us!--behold a new candidate come--
  In his hand he upholds a prescription, new written:
He poiseth a pill-box 'twixt finger and thumb,
  And he asketh a seat 'mong the Peers of Great Britain!

"Forbid it," cried Jenky, "ye Viscounts, ye Earls!
  "Oh Rank, how thy glories would fall disenchanted,
"If coronets glistend with pills stead of pearls,
  "And the strawberry-leaves were by rhubarb supplanted!

"No--ask it not, ask it not, dear Doctor Holford--
  "If naught but a Peerage can gladden thy life,
"And young Master Holford as yet is too small for't,
  "Sweet Doctor, we'll make a _she_ Peer of thy wife.

"Next to bearing a coronet on our _own_ brows
  "Is to bask in its light from the brows of another;
"And grandeur o'er thee shall reflect from thy spouse,
  "As o'er Vesey Fitzgerald 'twill shine thro' his mother."[2]

Thus ended the _First_ Batch--and Jenky, much tired
  (It being no joke to make Lords by the heap),
Took a large dram of ether--the same that inspired
  His speech 'gainst the Papists--and prosed off to sleep.


[1] Created Lord Farnborough.

[2] Among the persons mentioned as likely to be raised to the
Peerage are the mother of Mr. Vesey Fitzgerald, etc.






SPEECH ON THE UMBRELLA QUESTION.[1]

BY LORD ELDON.

1827.


    "_vos_ inumbrelles _video_."--_Ex Juvenil_.
    GEORGII CANNINGII.[2]


My Lords, I'm accused of a trick that God knows is
  The last into which at my age I could fall--
Of leading this grave House of Peers by their noses,
  Wherever I choose, princes, bishops and all.

My Lords, on the question before us at present,
  No doubt I shall hear, "'Tis that cursed old fellow,
"That bugbear of all that is liberal and pleasant,
  "Who won't let the Lords give the man his umbrella!"

God forbid that your Lordships should knuckle to me;
  I am ancient--but were I as old as King Priam,
Not much, I confess, to your credit 'twould be,
  To mind such a twaddling old Trojan as I am.

I own, of our Protestant laws I am jealous,
  And long as God spares me will always maintain,
That _once_ having taken men's rights, or umbrellas,
  We ne'er should consent to restore them again.

What security have you, ye Bishops and Peers,
  If thus you give back Mr. Bell's _parapluie_,
That he mayn't with its stick, come about all your ears,
  And then--_where_ would your Protestant periwigs be?

No! heaven be my judge, were I dying to-day,
  Ere I dropt in the grave, like a medlar that's mellow,
"For God's sake"--at that awful moment I'd say--
  "For God's sake, _don't_ give Mr. Bell his umbrella."

["This address," says a ministerial journal, "delivered with amazing
emphasis and earnestness, occasioned an extraordinary sensation in the
House. Nothing since the memorable address of the Duke of York has
produced so remarkable an impression."]


[1] A case which interested the public very much at this period. A
gentleman, of the name, of Bell, having left his umbrella behind him in
the House of Lords, the doorkeepers (standing, no doubt, on the privileges
of that noble body) refused to restore it to him; and the above speech,
which may be considered as a _pendant_ to that of the Learned Earl on
the Catholic Question, arose out of the transaction.

[2] From Mr. Canning's translation of Jekyl's--

    "I say, my good fellows,
    As you've no umbrellas."






A PASTORAL BALLAD.

BY JOHN BULL.


    _Dublin, March 12, 1827_.--Friday, after the arrival of the
    packet bringing the account of the defeat of the Catholic Question, in
    the House of Commons, orders were sent to the Pigeon-House to forward
    5,000,000 rounds of musket-ball cartridge to the different garrisons
    round the country.--_Freeman's Journal_.


I have found out a gift for my Erin,
  A gift that will surely content her:--
Sweet pledge of a love so endearing!
  Five millions of bullets I've sent her.

She askt me for Freedom and Right,
  But ill she her wants understood;--
Ball cartridges, morning and night,
  Is a dose that will do her more good.

There is hardly a day of our lives
  But we read, in some amiable trials,
How husbands make love to their wives
  Thro' the medium of hemp and of vials.

_One_ thinks, with his mistress or mate
  A good halter is sure to agree--
That love-knot which, early and late,
  I have tried, my dear Erin, on thee.

While _another_, whom Hymen has blest
  With a wife that is not over placid,
Consigns the dear charmer to rest,
  With a dose of the best Prussic acid.

Thus, Erin! my love do I show--
  Thus quiet thee, mate of my bed!
And, as poison and hemp are too slow,
  Do thy business with bullets instead.

Should thy faith in my medicine be shaken,
  Ask Roden, that mildest of saints;
He'll tell thee, lead, inwardly taken,
  Alone can remove thy complaints;--

That, blest as thou art in thy lot,
  Nothing's wanted to make it more pleasant
But being hanged, tortured and shot,
  Much oftener than thou art at present.

Even Wellington's self hath averred
  Thou art yet but half sabred and hung,
And I loved him the more when I heard
  Such tenderness fall from his tongue.

So take the five millions of pills,
  Dear partner, I herewith inclose;
'Tis the cure that all quacks for thy ill,
  From Cromwell to Eldon, propose.

And you, ye brave bullets that go,
  How I wish that, before you set out,
The _Devil_ of the Freischtz could know
  The good work you are going about.

For he'd charm ye, in spite of your lead.
  Into such supernatural wit.
That you'd all of you know, as you sped,
  Where a bullet of sense _ought_ to hit.






A LATE SCENE AT SWANAGE.[1]


    _regnis_ EX _sul ademptis_.--Verg. 1827.


To Swanage--that neat little town in whose bay
  Fair Thetis shows off in her best silver slippers--
Lord Bags[2] took his annual trip t'other day,
  To taste the sea breezes and chat with the dippers.

There--learned as he is in conundrums and laws--
  Quoth he to his dame (whom he oft plays the wag on),
  "Why are chancery suitors like bathers?"--"Because
  Their _suits_ are _put off_, till they haven't a rag on."

Thus on he went chatting--but, lo! while he chats,
  With a face full of wonder around him he looks;
For he misses his parsons, his dear shovel hats,
  Who used to flock round him at Swanage like rooks.

"How is this, Lady Bags?--to this region aquatic
"Last year they came swarming to make me their bow,
"As thick as Burke's cloud o'er the vales of Carnatic,
"Deans, Rectors, D.D.'s--where the devil are they now?"

"My dearest Lord Bags!" saith his dame, "_can_ you doubt?
  "I am loath to remind you of things so unpleasant;
"But _don't_ you perceive, dear, the Church have found out
  "That you're one of the people called _Ex's_, at present?"

"Ah, true--you have hit it--I _am_, indeed, one
  "Of those ill-fated _Ex's_ (his Lordship replies),
"And with tears, I confess--God forgive me the pun!--
  "We X's have proved ourselves _not_ to be Y's."


[1] A small bathing-place on the coast of Dorsetshire, long a favorite
summer resort of the ex-nobleman in question and, _till this season_, much
frequented also by gentlemen of the church.

[2] The Lord Chancellor Eldon.






WO! WO![1]


Wo, wo unto him who would check or disturb it--
  That beautiful Light which is now on its way;
Which beaming, at first, o'er the bogs of Belturbet,
  Now brightens sweet Ballinafad with its ray!

Oh Farnham, Saint Farnham, how much do we owe thee!
  How formed to all tastes are thy various employs.
The old, as a catcher of Catholics, know thee;
  The young, as an amateur scourger of boys.

Wo, wo to the man who such doings would smother!--
  On, Luther of Bavan! On, Saint of Kilgroggy!
With whip in one hand and with Bible in t'other,
  Like Mungo's tormentor, both "preachee and floggee."

Come, Saints from all quarters, and marshal his way;
  Come, Lorton, who, scorning profane erudition,
Popt Shakespeare, they say, in the river one day,
  Tho' 'twas only old Bowdler's _Velluti_ edition.

Come, Roden, who doubtest--so mild are thy views--
  Whether Bibles or bullets are best for the nation;
Who leav'st to poor Paddy no medium to choose
  'Twixt good _old_ Rebellion and _new_ Reformation.

What more from her Saints can Hibernia require?
  St. Bridget of yore like a dutiful daughter
Supplied her, 'tis said, with perpetual fire,[2]
  And Saints keep her _now_ in eternal hot water.

Wo, wo to the man who would check their career,
  Or stop the Millennium that's sure to await us,
When blest with an orthodox crop every year,
  We shall learn to raise Protestants fast as potatoes.

In kidnapping Papists, our rulers, we know,
  Had been trying their talent for many a day;
Till Farnham, when all had been tried, came to show,
  Like the German flea-catcher, "anoder goot way."

And nothing's more simple than Farnham's receipt;--
  "Catch your Catholic, first--soak him well in _poteen_,
"Add _salary_ sauce,[3] and the thing is complete.
  "You may serve up your Protestant smoking and clean."

"Wo, wo to the wag, who would laugh at such cookery!"
  Thus, from his perch, did I hear a black crow[4]
Caw angrily out, while the rest of the rookery
  Opened their bills and re-echoed "Wo! wo!"


[1] Suggested by a speech of the Bishop of Chester on the subject of the
New Reformation in Ireland, in which his Lordship denounced "Wo! Wo! Wo!"
pretty abundantly on all those who dared to interfere with its progress.

[2] The inextenguishable fire of St. Bridget, at Kildare.

[3] "We understand that several applications have lately been made to the
Protestant clergymen of this town by fellows, inquiring 'What are they
giving a head for converts?'"--_Wexford Post_.

[4] Of the rook species--_Corvus frugilegus_, i.e. a great consumer of
corn.






TOUT POUR LA TRIPE.


    "If in China or among the natives of India, we claimed civil
    advantages which were connected with religious usages, little as
    we might value those forms in our hearts, we should think common
    decency required us to abstain from treating them with offensive
    contumely; and, though unable to consider them sacred, we would not
    sneer at the name of _Fot_, or laugh at the imputed divinity
    of _Visthnou_."--_Courier, Tuesday. Jan_. 16.


1827.


Come take my advice, never trouble your cranium,
  When "civil advantages" are to be gained,
What god or what goddess may help to obtain you 'em,
  Hindoo or Chinese, so they're only obtained.

In this world (let me hint in your organ auricular)
  All the good things to good hypocrites fall;
And he who in swallowing creeds is particular,
  Soon will have nothing to swallow at all.

Oh place me where _Fo_ (or, as some call him, _Fot_)
  Is the god from whom "civil advantages" flow,
And you'll find, if there's anything snug to be got,
  I shall soon be on excellent terms with old _Fo_.

Or were I where _Vishnu_, that four-handed god,
  Is the quadruple giver of pensions and places,
I own I should feel it unchristian and odd
  Not to find myself also in _Vishnu's_ good graces.

For among all the gods that humanely attend
  To our wants in this planet, the gods to _my_ wishes
Are those that, like _Vishnu_ and others, descend
  In the form so attractive, of loaves and of fishes![1]

So take my advice--for if even the devil
  Should tempt men again as an idol to try him,
'Twere best for us Tories even then to be civil,
  As nobody doubts we should get something by him.


[1] Vishnu was (as Sir W. Jones calls him) "a pisciform god,"--his first
Avatar being in the shape of a fish.






ENIGMA.


    _monstrum nulla virtute_ redemptum.


Come, riddle-me-ree, come, riddle-me-ree,
  And tell me what my name may be.
I am nearly one hundred and thirty years old,
  And therefore no chicken, as you may suppose;--
Tho' a dwarf in my youth (as my nurses have told),
  I have, every year since, been out-growing my clothes:
Till at last such a corpulent giant I stand,
  That if folks were to furnish me now with a suit,
It would take every morsel of _scrip_ in the land
  But to measure my bulk from the head to the foot.
Hence they who maintain me, grown sick of my stature,
  To cover me nothing but _rags_ will supply;
And the doctors declare that in due course of nature
  About the year 30 in rags I shall die.
Meanwhile, I stalk hungry and bloated around,
  An object of _interest_ most painful to all;
In the warehouse, the cottage, the place I'm found,
  Holding citizen, peasant, and king in nay thrall.
    Then riddle-me-ree, oh riddle-me-ree,
    Come tell me what my name may be.

When the lord of the counting-house bends o'er his book,
  Bright pictures of profit delighting to draw,
O'er his shoulders with large cipher eyeballs I look,
  And down drops the pen from his paralyzed paw!
When the Premier lies dreaming of dear Waterloo,
  And expects thro' _another_ to caper and prank it,
You'd laugh did you see, when I bellow out "Boo!"
  How he hides his brave Waterloo head in the blanket.
When mighty Belshazzar brims high in the hall
  His cup, full of gout, to the Gaul's overthrow,
Lo, "_Eight Hundred Millions_" I write on the wall,
  And the cup falls to earth and--the gout to his toe!
But the joy of my heart is when largely I cram
  My maw with the fruits of the Squirearchy's acres,
And knowing who made me the thing that I am,
  Like the monster of Frankenstein, worry my makers.
    Then riddle-me-ree, come, riddle-me-ree,
    And tell, if thou know'st, who _I_ may be.






DOG-DAY REFLECTIONS.

BY A DANDY KEPT IN TOWN.


    _"vox clamantis in deserto."_


1827.


Said Malthus one day to a clown
  Lying stretched on the beach in the sun,--
"What's the number of souls in this town?"--
  "The number! Lord bless you, there's none.

"We have nothing but _dabs_ in this place,
  "Of them a great plenty there are;--
But the _soles_, please your reverence and grace,
  "Are all t'other side of the bar."

And so 'tis in London just now,
  Not a soul to be seen up or down;--
Of _dabs_? a great glut, I allow,
  But your _soles_, every one, out of town.

East or west nothing wondrous or new,
  No courtship or scandal worth knowing;
Mrs. B---, and a Mermaid[1] or two,
  Are the only loose fish that are going.

Ah, where is that dear house of Peers
  That some weeks ago kept us merry?
Where, Eldon, art thou with thy tears?
And thou with thy sense, Londonderry?

Wise Marquis, how much the Lord Mayor,
  In the dog-days, with _thee_ must be puzzled!--
It being his task to take care
  That such animals shan't go unmuzzled.

Thou too whose political toils
  Are so worthy a captain of horse--
Whose amendments[2] (like honest Sir Boyle's)
  Are "_amendments_, that make matters _worse_;"[3]

Great Chieftain, who takest such pains
  To prove--what is granted, _nem_. _con_.--
With how moderate a portion of brains
  Some heroes contrive to get on.

And thou too my Redesdale, ah! where
  Is the peer with a star at his button,
Whose _quarters_ could ever compare
  With Redesdale's five quarters of mutton?[4]

Why, why have ye taken your flight,
  Ye diverting and dignified crew?
How ill do three farces a night,
  At the Haymarket, pay us for you!

For what is Bombastes to thee,
  My Ellenbro', when thou look'st big
Or where's the burletta can be
  Like Lauderdale's wit and his wig?

I doubt if even Griffinhoof[5] could
  (Tho' Griffin's a comical lad)
Invent any joke half so good
  As that precious one, "This is too bad!"

Then come again, come again Spring!
  Oh haste thee, with Fun in thy train;
And--of all things the funniest--bring
  These exalted Grimaldis again!


[1] One of the shows of London.

[2] More particularly his Grace's celebrated amendment to the Corn Bill:
for which, and the circumstances connected with it, see Annual Register
for A. D. 1827.

[3] From a speech of Sir Boyle Roche's, in the Irish House of Commons.

[4] The learning his Lordship displayed on the subject of the butcher's
"fifth quarter" of mutton will not speedily be forgotten.

[5] The _nom de guerre_ under which Colman has written some of his
best farces.






THE "LIVING DOG" AND "THE DEAD LION."

1828.


Next week will be published (as "Lives" are the rage)
  The whole Reminiscences, wondrous and strange,
Of a small puppy-dog that lived once in the cage
  Of the late noble Lion at Exeter 'Change.

Tho' the dog is a dog of the kind they call "sad,"
  'Tis a puppy that much to good breeding pretends;
And few dogs have such opportunities had
  Of knowing how Lions behave--among friends;

How that animal eats, how he snores, how he drinks,
  Is all noted down by this Boswell so small;
And 'tis plain from each sentence, the puppy-dog thinks
  That the Lion was no such great things after all.

Tho' he roared pretty well--this the puppy allows--
  It was all, he says, borrowed--all second-hand roar;
And he vastly prefers his own little bow-wows
  To the loftiest war-note the Lion could pour.

'Tis indeed as good fun as a _Cynic_ could ask,
  To see how this cockney-bred setter of rabbits
Takes gravely the Lord of the Forest to task,
  And judges of lions by puppy-dog habits.

Nay, fed as he was (and this makes it a dark case)
  With sops every day from the Lion's own pan,
He lifts up his leg at the noble beast's carcass.
  And does all a dog so diminutive can.

However, the book's a good book, being rich in
  Examples and warnings to lions high-bred,
How they suffer small mongrelly curs in their kitchen,
  Who'll feed on them living and foul them when dead.

T. PIDCOCK

_Exeter 'Change_,






ODE TO DON MIGUEL.


    Et tu, _Brute_!


1828.[1]


What! Miguel, _not_ patriotic! oh, fy!
  After so much good teaching 'tis quite a _take-in_, Sir;
First schooled as you were under Metternich's eye,
  And then (as young misses say) "finisht" at Windsor![2]

I ne'er in my life knew a case that was harder;--
  Such feasts as you had when you made us a call!
Three courses each day from his Majesty's larder,--
  And now to turn absolute Don after all!!

Some authors, like Bayes, to the style and the matter
  Of each thing they _write_ suit the way that they _dine_,
Roast sirloin for Epic, broiled devils for Satire,
  And hotchpotch and _trifle_ for rhymes such as mine.

That Rulers should feed the same way, I've no doubt;--
  Great Despots on _bouilli_ served up _ la Russe_,[3]
Your small German Princes on frogs and sour crout,
  And your Viceroy of Hanover always on _goose_.

_Some_ Dons too have fancied (tho' this may be fable)
  A dish rather dear, if in cooking they blunder it;--
Not content with the common _hot_ meat _on_ a table,
  They're partial (eh, Mig?) to a dish of _cold under_ it![4]

No wonder a Don of such appetites found
  Even Windsor's collations plebeianly plain;
Where the dishes most _high_ that my Lady sends round
  Are here _Maintenon_ cutlets and soup _ la Reine_.

Alas! that a youth with such charming beginnings,
  Should sink all at once to so sad a conclusion,
And what is still worse, throw the losings and winnings
  Of worthies on 'Change into so much confusion!

The Bulls, in hysterics--the Bears just as bad--
  The few men who _have_, and the many who've _not_ tick,
All shockt to find out that that promising lad,
  Prince Metternich's pupil, is--_not_ patriotic!


[1] At the commencement of this year, the designs of Don Miguel and his
partisans against the constitution established by his brother had begun
more openly to declare themselves.

[2] Don Miguel had paid a visit to the English court at the close of the
year 1827.

[3] Dressed with a pint of the strongest spirits--a favorite dish of the
Great Frederick of Prussia, and which he persevered in eating even on his
death-bed, much to the horror of his physician Zimmerman.

[4] This quiet case of murder, with all its particulars--the hiding the
body under the dinner-table, etc.--is, no doubt, well known to the reader.






THOUGHTS ON THE PRESENT GOVERNMENT OF IRELAND.

1828.


Oft have I seen, in gay, equestrian pride,
Some well-rouged youth round Astley's Circus ride
Two stately steeds--standing, with graceful straddle,
Like him of Rhodes, with foot on either saddle,
While to soft tunes--some jigs and some _andantes_--
He steers around his light-paced Rosinantes.

So rides along, with canter smooth and pleasant,
That horseman bold, Lord Anglesea, at present;--
_Papist_ and _Protestant_ the coursers twain,
That lend their necks to his impartial rein,
And round the ring--each honored, as they go,
With equal pressure from his gracious toe--

To the old medley tune, half "Patrick's Day"
And half "Boyne Water," take their cantering way,
While Peel, the showman in the middle, cracks
His long-lasht whip to cheer the doubtful hacks.
Ah, ticklish trial of equestrian art!
How blest, if neither steed would bolt or start;--
If _Protestant's_ old restive tricks were gone,
And _Papist's_ winkers could be still kept on!
But no, false hopes--not even the great Ducrow
'Twixt two such steeds could 'scape an overthrow:
If _solar_ hacks played Phaton a trick,
What hope, alas, from hackneys _lunatic_?

If once my Lord his graceful balance loses,
Or fails to keep each foot where each horse chooses;
If Peel but gives one _extra_ touch of whip
To _Papist's_ tail or _Protestant's_ ear-tip--
That instant ends their glorious horsmanship!
Off bolt the severed steeds, for mischief free.
And down between them plumps Lord Anglesea!






THE LIMBO OF LOST REPUTATIONS.

A DREAM.


    "_Cio che si perde qui, l si raguna_."
    ARIOSTO.

    "---a valley, where he sees
    Things that on earth were lost."
    MILTON.


1828.


Knowest thou not him[1] the poet sings,
  Who flew to the moon's serene domain,
And saw that valley where all the things,
  That vanish on earth are found again--
The hopes of youth, the resolves of age,
The vow of the lover, the dream of the sage,
The golden visions of mining cits,
  The promises great men strew about them;
And, packt in compass small, the wits
  Of monarchs who rule as well without them!--
Like him, but diving with wing profound,
I have been to a Limbo underground,
Where characters lost on earth, (and _cried_,
In vain, like Harris's, far and wide,)
In heaps like yesterday's orts, are thrown
And there, so worthless and flyblown
That even the imps would not purloin them,
Lie till their worthy owners join them.

Curious it was to see this mass
  Of lost and torn-up reputations;--
Some of them female wares, alas!
  Mislaid at _innocent_ assignations;
Some, that had sighed their last amen
  From the canting lips of saints that would be;
And some once owned by "the best of men,"
  Who had proved-no better than they should be.
'Mong others, a poet's fame I spied,
  Once shining fair, now soakt and black--
"No wonder" (an imp at my elbow cried),
  "For I pickt it out of a butt of sack!"

Just then a yell was heard o'er head,
  Like a chimney-sweeper's lofty summons;
And lo! a devil right downward sped,
Bringing within his claws so red
Two statesmen's characters, found, he said,
  Last night, on the floor of the House of Commons;
The which, with black official grin,
He now to the Chief Imp handed in;--
_Both_ these articles much the worse
  For their journey down, as you may suppose;
But _one_ so devilish rank--"Odd's curse!".
  Said the Lord Chief Imp, and held his nose.
"Ho, ho!" quoth he, "I know full well
  "From whom these two stray matters fell;"--
Then, casting away, with loathful shrug,
The uncleaner waif (as he would a drug
The Invisible's own dark hand had mixt),
His gaze on the other[2] firm he fixt,
And trying, tho' mischief laught in his eye,
To be moral because of the _young_ imps by,
"What a pity!" he cried--"so fresh its gloss,
"So long preserved--'tis a public loss!
"This comes of a man, the careless blockhead,
"Keeping his character in his pocket;
"And there--without considering whether
"There's room for that and his gains together--
"Cramming and cramming and cramming away,
"Till--out slips character some fine day!

"However"--and here he viewed it round--
"This article still may pass for sound.
"Some flaws, soon patched, some stains are all
"The harm it has had in its luckless fall.
"Here, Puck!" and he called to one of his train--
"The owner may have this back again.
"Tho' damaged for ever, if used with skill,
"It may serve perhaps to _trade on_ still;
"Tho' the gem can never as once be set,
"It will do for a Tory Cabinet."


[1] Astolpho.

[2] Huskisson.






HOW TO WRITE BY PROXY.


    _qui facit per alium facit per se_.


'Mong our neighbors, the French, in the good olden time
  When Nobility flourisht, great Barons and Dukes
Often set up for authors in prose and in rhyme,
  But ne'er took the trouble to write their own books.

Poor devils were found to do this for their betters;--
  And one day a Bishop, addressing a _Blue_,
Said, "Ma'am, have you read my new Pastoral Letters?"
  To which the _Blue_ answered--"No, Bishop, have you?"

The same is now done by _our_ privileged class;
  And to show you how simple the process it needs,
If a great Major-General[1] wishes to pass
  For an author of History, thus he proceeds:--

First, scribbling his own stock of notions as well
  As he can, with a _goose_-quill that claims him as _kin_,
He settles his neckcloth--takes snuff--rings the bell,
  And yawningly orders a Subaltern in.

The Subaltern comes--sees his General seated,
  In all the self-glory of authorship swelling;--
"There look," saith his Lordship, "my work is completed,--
"It wants nothing now but the grammar and spelling."

Well used to a _breach_, the brave Subaltern dreads
  Awkward breaches of syntax a hundred times more;
And tho' often condemned to see breaking of heads,
  He had ne'er seen such breaking of Priscian's before.

However, the job's sure to _pay_--that's enough--
  So, to it he sets with his tinkering hammer,
Convinced that there never was job half so tough
As the mending a great Major-General's grammar.

But lo! a fresh puzzlement starts up to view--
  New toil for the Sub.--for the Lord new expense:
'Tis discovered that mending his _grammar_ won't do,
  As the Subaltern also must find him in _sense_!

At last--even this is achieved by his aid;
  Friend Subaltern pockets the cash and--the story;
Drums beat--the new Grand March of Intellect's played--
  And off struts my Lord, the Historian, in glory!


[1] Or Lieutenant-General, as it may happen to be.






IMITATION OF THE INFERNO OF DANTE.


    _"Cosi quel fiato gli spiriti mali
    Di qu, di l, di giu, di su gli mena."_


    _Inferno_, canto 5.


I turned my steps and lo! a shadowy throng
Of ghosts came fluttering towards me--blown along,
Like cockchafers in high autumnal storms,
By many a fitful gust that thro' their forms
Whistled, as on they came, with wheezy puff,
And puft as--tho' they'd never puff enough.

"Whence and what are ye?" pitying I inquired
Of these poor ghosts, who, tattered, tost, and tired
With such eternal puffing, scarce could stand
On their lean legs while answering my demand.
"We once were authors"--thus the Sprite, who led
This tag-rag regiment of spectres, said--
"Authors of every sex, male, female, neuter,
"Who, early smit with love of praise and--_pewter_,[1]
"On C--lb--n's shelves first saw the light of day,
"In ---'s puffs exhaled our lives away--
"Like summer windmills, doomed to dusty peace,
"When the brisk gales that lent them motion, cease.
"Ah! little knew we then what ills await
"Much-lauded scribblers in their after-state;
"Bepuft on earth--how loudly Str--t can tell--
"And, dire reward, now doubly puft in hell!"

  Touched with compassion for this ghastly crew,
Whose ribs even now the hollow wind sung thro'
In mournful prose,--such prose as Rosa's[2] ghost
Still, at the accustomed hour of eggs and toast,
Sighs thro' the columns of the _Morning Post_,--
Pensive I turned to weep, when he who stood
Foremost of all that flatulential brood,
Singling a _she_-ghost from the party, said,
"Allow me to present Miss X. Y. Z.,[3]
"One of our _lettered_ nymphs--excuse the pun--
"Who gained a name on earth by--having none;
"And whose initials would immortal be,
"Had she but learned those plain ones, A. B. C.

"Yon smirking ghost, like mummy dry and neat,
"Wrapt in his own dead rhymes--fit winding-sheet--
"Still marvels much that not a soul should care
"One single pin to know who wrote 'May Fair;'--
"While this young gentleman," (here forth he drew
A dandy spectre, puft quite thro' and thro',
As tho' his ribs were an AEolian lyre
For the whole Row's soft _trade_winds to inspire,)
"This modest genius breathed one wish alone,
"To have his volume read, himself unknown;
"But different far the course his glory took,
"All knew the author, and--none read the book.

"Behold, in yonder ancient figure of fun,
"Who rides the blast, Sir Jonah Barrington;--
"In tricks to raise the wind his life was spent,
"And now the wind returns the compliment.
"This lady here, the Earl of ---'s sister,
"Is a dead novelist; and this is Mister--
"Beg pardon--_Honorable_ Mister Lister,
"A gentleman who some weeks since came over
"In a smart puff (wind S. S. E.) to Dover.
"Yonder behind us limps young Vivian Grey,
"Whose life, poor youth, was long since blown away--
"Like a torn paper-kite on which the wind
"No further purchase for a puff can find."

"And thou, thyself"--here, anxious, I exclaimed--
"Tell us, good ghost, how thou, thyself, art named."
"Me, Sir!" he blushing cried--"Ah! there's the rub--
"Know, then--a waiter once at Brooks's Club,
"A waiter still I might have long remained,
"And long the club-room's jokes and glasses drained;
"But ah! in luckless hour, this last December,
"I wrote a book,[4] and Colburn dubbed me 'Member'--
"'Member of Brooks's!'--oh Promethean puff,
"To what wilt thou exalt even kitchen-stuff!
"With crumbs of gossip, caught from dining wits,
"And half-heard jokes, bequeathed, like half-chewed bits,
"To be, each night, the waiter's perquisites;--
"With such ingredients served up oft before,
"But with fresh fudge and fiction garnisht o'er,
"I managed for some weeks to dose the town,
"Till fresh reserves of nonsense ran me down;
"And ready still even waiters' souls to damn,
"The Devil but rang his bell, and--here I am;--
"Yes--'Coming _up_, Sir,' once my favorite cry,
"Exchanged for 'Coming _down_, Sir,' here am I!"

Scarce had the Spectre's lips these words let drop,
When, lo! a breeze--such as from ---'s shop
Blows in the vernal hour when puffs prevail,
And speeds the _sheets_ and swells the lagging _sale_--
Took the poor waiter rudely in the poop,
And whirling him and all his grisly group
Of literary ghosts--Miss X. Y. Z.--
The nameless author, better known than read--
Sir Jo--the Honorable Mr. Lister,
And last, not least, Lord Nobody's twin-sister--
Blew them, ye gods, with all their prose and rhymes
And sins about them, far into those climes
"Where Peter pitched his waistcoat"[5] in old times,
Leaving me much in doubt as on I prest,
With my great master, thro' this realm unblest,
Whether Old Nick or Colburn puffs the best.


[1] The classical term for money.

[2] Rosa Matilda, who was for many years the writer of the political
articles in the journal alluded to, and whose spirit still seems to
preside--"_regnat Rosa_"--over its pages.

[3] _Not_ the charming L. E. L., and still less, Mrs. F. H., whose poetry
is among the most beautiful of the present day.

[4] "History of the Clubs of London," announced as by "a Member of
Brooks's."

[5]A _Dantesque_ allusion to the old saying "Nine miles beyond Hell, where
Peter pitched his waistcoat."






LAMENT FOR THE LOSS OF LORD BATHURST'S TAIL.[1]


All _in_ again--unlookt for bliss!
Yet, ah! _one_ adjunct still we miss;--
One tender tie, attached so long
To the same head, thro' right and wrong.
Why, Bathurst, why didst thou cut off
  That memorable tail of thine?
Why--as if _one_ was not enough--
  Thy pig-tie with thy place resign,
And thus at once both _cut_ and _run_?
Alas! my Lord, 'twas not well done,
'Twas not, indeed,--tho' sad at heart,
From office and its sweets to part,
Yet hopes of coming in again,
Sweet Tory hopes! beguiled our pain;
But thus to miss that tail of thine,
Thro' long, long years our rallying sign--
As if the State and all its powers
By tenancy _in tail_ were ours--
To see it thus by scissors fall,
_This_ was "the unkindest _cut_ of all!"
It seemed as tho' the ascendant day
Of Toryism had past away,
And proving Samson's story true,
She lost her vigor with her _queue_.

Parties are much like fish, 'tis said--
The tail directs them, not the head;
Then how could _any_ party fail,
That steered its course by Bathurst's tail?
Not Murat's plume thro' Wagram's fight
  E'er shed such guiding glories from it,
As erst in all true Tories sight,
  Blazed from our old Colonial comet!
If you, my Lord, a Bashaw were,
(As Wellington will be anon)
Thou mightst have had a tail to spare;
  But no! alas! thou hadst but one,
  And _that_--like Troy, or Babylon,
  A tale of other times--is gone!
Yet--weep ye not, ye Tories true--
  Fate has not yet of all bereft us;
Though thus deprived of Bathurst's _queue_,
  We've Ellenborough's _curls_ still left us:--
Sweet curls, from which young Love, so vicious,
His shots, as from nine-pounders, issues;
Grand, glorious curls, which in debate
Surcharged with all a nation's fate,
His Lordship shakes, as Homer's God did,[2]
  And oft in thundering talk comes near him;
Except that there the _speaker_ nodded
  And here 'tis only those who hear him.
Long, long, ye ringlets, on the soil
  Of that fat cranium may ye flourish,
With plenty of Macassar oil
  Thro' many a year your growth to nourish!
And ah! should Time too soon unsheath
  His barbarous shears such locks to sever,
Still dear to Tories even in death,
Their last loved relics we'll bequeath,
  A _hair_-loom to our sons for ever.


[1] The noble Lord, as is well known, cut off this much-respected
appendage on his retirement from office some months since.

[2] "Shakes his ambrosial curls, and gives the nod."--Pope's _Homer_.






THE CHERRIES.

A PARABLE.[1]

1838.


See those cherries, how they cover
  Yonder sunny garden wall;--
Had they not that network over,
  Thieving birds would eat them all.

So to guard our posts and pensions,
  Ancient sages wove a net,
Thro' whose holes of small dimensions
  Only _certain_ knaves can get.

Shall we then this network widen;
  Shall we stretch these sacred holes,
Thro' which even already slide in
  Lots of small dissenting souls?

"God forbid!" old Testy crieth;
  "God forbid!" so echo I;
Every ravenous bird that flieth
  Then would at our cherries fly.

Ope but half an inch or so,
  And, behold! what bevies break in;--
_Here_ some curst old Popish crow
  Pops his long and lickerish beak in;

_Here_ sly Arians flock unnumbered,
  And Socinians, slim and spare,
Who with small belief encumbered
  Slip in easy anywhere;--

Methodists, of birds the aptest,
  Where there's _pecking_ going on;
And that water-fowl, the Baptist--
  All would share our fruits anon;

Every bird of every city,
  That for years with ceaseless din,
Hath reverst the starling's ditty,
  Singing out "I can't get in."

"God forbid!" old _Testy_ snivels;
  "God forbid!" I echo too;
Rather may ten thousand devils
  Seize the whole voracious crew!

If less costly fruits won't suit 'em,
  Hips and haws and such like berries,
Curse the cormorants! stone 'em, shoot 'em,
  Anything--to save our cherries.


[1] Written during the late discussion on the Test and Corporation Acts.






STANZAS WRITTEN IN ANTICIPATION OF DEFEAT.[1]

1828.


Go seek for some abler defenders of wrong,
  If we _must_ run the gantlet thro' blood and expense;
Or, Goths as ye are, in your multitude strong,
  Be content with success and pretend not to sense.

If the words of the wise and the generous are vain,
  If Truth by the bowstring _must_ yield up her breath,
Let Mutes do the office--and spare her the pain
  Of an Inglis or Tyndal to talk her to death.

Chain, persecute, plunder--do all that you will--
  But save us, at least, the old womanly lore
Of a Foster, who, dully prophetic of ill,
  Is at once the _two_ instruments, AUGUR[2] and BORE.

Bring legions of Squires--if they'll only be mute--
  And array their thick heads against reason and right,
Like the Roman of old, of historic repute,[3]
  Who with droves of dumb animals carried the fight;

Pour out from each corner and hole of the Court
  Your Bedchamber lordlings, your salaried slaves,
Who, ripe for all job-work, no matter what sort,
  Have their consciences tackt to their patents and staves.

Catch all the small fry who, as Juvenal sings,
  Are the Treasury's creatures, wherever they swim;
With all the base, time-serving _toadies_ of Kings,
  Who, if Punch were the monarch, would worship even him;

And while on the _one_ side each name of renown
  That illumines and blesses our age is combined;
While the Foxes, the Pitts, and the Cannings look down,
  And drop o'er the cause their rich mantles of Mind;

Let bold Paddy Holmes show his troops on the other,
  And, counting of noses the quantum desired,
Let Paddy but say, like the Gracchi's famed mother,
  "Come forward, my _jewels_"--'tis all that's required.

And thus let your farce be enacted hereafter--
  Thus honestly persecute, outlaw and chain;
But spare even your victims the torture of laughter,
  And never, oh never, try _reasoning_ again!


[1] During the discussion of the Catholic question in the House of Commons
last session.

[2] This rhyme is more for the ear than the eye, as the carpenter's tool
is spelt _auger_.

[3] Fabius, who sent droves of bullock against the enemy.






ODE TO THE WOODS AND FORESTS.

BY ONE OF THE BOARD.

1828.


Let other bards to groves repair,
  Where linnets strain their tuneful throats;
Mine be the Woods and Forests where
  The Treasury pours its sweeter _notes_.

No whispering winds have charms for me,
  Nor zephyr's balmy sighs I ask;
To raise the wind for Royalty
  Be all our Sylvan zephyr's task!

And 'stead of crystal brooks and floods,
  And all such vulgar irrigation,
Let Gallic rhino thro' our Woods
  Divert its "course of liquidation."

Ah, surely, Vergil knew full well
  What Woods and Forests _ought_ to be,
When sly, he introduced in hell
  His guinea-plant, his bullion-tree;[1]--

Nor see I why, some future day,
  When short of cash, we should not send
Our Herries down--he knows the way--
  To see if Woods in hell will _lend_.

Long may ye flourish, sylvan haunts,
  Beneath whose "_branches_ of expense"
Our gracious King gets all he wants,--
  _Except_ a little taste and sense.

Long, in your golden shade reclined.
  Like him of fair Armida's bowers,
May Wellington some _wood_-nymph find,
  To cheer his dozenth lustrum's hours;

To rest from toil the Great Untaught,
  And soothe the pangs his warlike brain
Must suffer, when, unused to thought,
  It tries to think and--tries in vain.

Oh long may Woods and Forests be
  Preserved in all their teeming graces,
To shelter Tory bards like me
  Who take delight in Sylvan _places_!


[1] Called by Vergil, botanically, "species _aurifrondentis_."






STANZAS FROM THE BANKS OF THE SHANNON.[1]

1828.


    "Take back the virgin page."
    MOORE'S _Irish Melodies_.


No longer dear Vesey, feel hurt and uneasy
  At hearing it said by the Treasury brother,
That thou art a sheet of blank paper, my Vesey,
  And he, the dear, innocent placeman, another.[2]

For lo! what a service we Irish have done thee;--
  Thou now art a sheet of blank paper no more;
By St. Patrick, we've scrawled such a lesson upon thee
  As never was scrawled upon foolscap before.

Come--on with your spectacles, noble Lord Duke,
  (Or O'Connell has _green_ ones he haply would lend you,)
Read Vesey all o'er (as you _can't_ read a book)
  And improve by the lesson we bog-trotters send you;

A lesson, in large _Roman_ characters traced,
  Whose awful impressions from you and your kin
Of blank-sheeted statesmen will ne'er be effaced--
  Unless, 'stead of _paper_, you're mere _asses' skin_.

Shall I help you to construe it? ay, by the Gods,
  Could I risk a translation, you _should_ have a rare one;
But pen against sabre is desperate odds,
  And you, my Lord Duke (as you _hinted_ once), wear one.

Again and again I say, read Vesey o'er;--
  You will find him worth all the old scrolls of papyrus
That Egypt e'er filled with nonsensical lore,
  Or the learned Champollion e'er wrote of, to tire us.

All blank as he was, we've returned him on hand,
  Scribbled o'er with a warning to Princes and Dukes,
Whose plain, simple drift if they _won't_ understand,
  Tho' carest at St. James's, they're fit for St. Luke's.

Talk of leaves of the Sibyls!--more meaning conveyed is
  In one single leaf such as now we have spelled on,
Than e'er hath been uttered by all the old ladies
  That ever yet spoke, from the Sibyls to Eldon.


[1] These verses were suggested by the result of the Clare election, in
the year 1828, when the Right Honorable W. Vesey Fitzgerald was rejected,
and Mr. O'Connell returned.

[2] Some expressions to this purport, in a published letter of one of
these gentlemen, had then produced a good deal of amusement.






THE ANNUAL PILL.


Supposed to be sung by OLD PROSY, the Jew, in the character of Major
CARTWRIGHT.


Vill nobodies try my nice _Annual Pill_,
  Dat's to purify every ting nashty avay?
Pless ma heart, pless ma heart, let ma say vat I vill,
  Not a Chrishtian or Shentleman minds vat I say.
  'Tis so pretty a bolus!--just down let it go,
  And, at vonce, such a _radical_ shange you vill see,
Dat I'd not be surprished, like de horse in de show,
  If your heads all vere found, vere your tailsh ought to be!
  Vill nobodies try my nice _Annual Pill_, etc.

'Twill cure all Electors and purge away clear
  Dat mighty bad itching dey've got in deir hands--
'Twill cure too all Statesmen of dulness, ma tear,
  Tho' the case vas as desperate as poor Mister VAN'S.
Dere is noting at all vat dis Pill vill not reach--
  Give the Sinecure Ghentleman van little grain,
Pless ma heart, it vill act, like de salt on de leech,
  And he'll throw de pounds, shillings, and pence, up again!
  Vill nobodies try my nice _Annual Pill_, etc.

'Twould be tedious, ma tear, all its peauties to paint--
  "But, among oder tings _fundamentally_ wrong,
It vill cure de Proad Pottom[1]--a common complaint
  Among M.P.'s and weavers--from _sitting_ too long.
Should symptoms of _speeching_ preak out on a dunce
  (Vat is often de case), it vill stop de disease,
And pring avay all de long speeches at vonce,
  Dat else vould, like tape-worms, come by degrees!

Vill nobodies try my nice _Annual Pill_,
  Dat's to purify every ting nashty avay?
Pless ma heart, pless ma heart, let me say vat I vill,
  Not a Chrishtian or Shentleman minds vat I say!


[1] Meaning, I presume, _Coalition_ Administrations.






"IF" AND "PERHAPS."[1]


Oh tidings of freedom! oh accents of hope!
  Waft, waft them, ye zephyrs, to Erin's blue sea,
And refresh with their sounds every son of the Pope,
  From Dingle-a-cooch to far Donaghadee.

"_If_ mutely the slave will endure and obey,
  "Nor clanking his fetters nor breathing his pains,
"His masters _perhaps_ at some far distant day
  "May _think_ (tender tyrants!) of loosening his chains."

Wise "if" and "perhaps!"--precious salve for our wounds,
  If he who would rule thus o'er manacled mutes,
Could check the free spring-tide of Mind that resounds,
  Even now at his feet, like the sea at Canute's.

But, no, 'tis in vain--the grand impulse is given--
  Man knows his high Charter, and knowing will claim;
And if ruin _must_ follow where fetters are riven,
  Be theirs who have forged them the guilt and the shame.

"_If_ the slave will be silent!"--vain Soldier, beware--
  There _is_ a dead silence the wronged may assume,
When the feeling, sent back from the lips in despair,
  But clings round the heart with a deadlier gloom;--

When the blush that long burned on the suppliant's cheek,
  Gives place to the avenger's pale, resolute hue;
And the tongue that once threatened, disdaining to _speak_,
  Consigns to the arm the high office--to _do_.

_If_ men in that silence should think of the hour
  When proudly their fathers in panoply stood,
Presenting alike a bold front-work of power
  To the despot on land and the foe on the flood:--

That hour when a Voice had come forth from the west,
  To the slave bringing hopes, to the tyrant alarms;
And a lesson long lookt for was taught the opprest,
  That kings are as dust before freemen in arms!

_If_, awfuller still, the mute slave should recall
  That dream of his boyhood, when Freedom's sweet day
At length seemed to break thro' a long night of thrall,
  And Union and Hope went abroad in its ray;--

_If_ Fancy should tell him, that Dayspring of Good,
  Tho' swiftly its light died away from his chain,
Tho' darkly it set in a nation's best blood,
  Now wants but invoking to shine out again;

_If--if_, I say--breathings like these should come o'er
  The chords of remembrance, and thrill as they come,
Then,--_perhaps_--ay, _perhaps_--but I dare not say more;
  Thou hast willed that thy slaves should be mute--I am dumb.


[1] Written after hearing a celebrated speech in the House of Lords, June
10, 1828, when the motion in favor of Catholic Emancipation, brought
forward by the Marquis of Lansdowne, was rejected by the House of Lords.






WRITE ON, WRITE ON.

A BALLAD.


Air.--"_Sleep on, sleep on, my Kathleen dear.
          salvete, fratres Asini_. ST. FRANCIS.


Write on, write on, ye Barons dear,
  Ye Dukes, write hard and fast;
The good we've sought for many a year
  Your quills will bring at last.
One letter more, Newcastle, pen,
  To match Lord Kenyon's _two_,
And more than Ireland's host of men,
  One brace of Peers will do.
          Write on, write on, etc.

Sure never since the precious use
  Of pen and ink began,
Did letters writ by fools produce
  Such signal good to man.
While intellect, 'mong high and low,
  Is marching _on_, they say,
Give _me_ the Dukes and Lords who go
Like crabs, the _other_ way.
          Write on, write on, etc.

Even now I feel the coming light--
  Even now, could Folly lure
My Lord Mountcashel too to write,
  Emancipation's sure.
By geese (we read in history),
  Old Rome was saved from ill;
And now to _quills_ of geese we see
  Old Rome indebted still.
          Write on, write on, etc.

Write, write, ye Peers, nor stoop to style,
  Nor beat for sense about--
Things little worth a Noble's while
  You're better far without.
Oh ne'er, since asses spoke of yore,
  Such miracles were done;
For, write but four such letters more,
  And Freedom's cause is won!






SONG OF THE DEPARTING SPIRIT OF TITHE.


    "The parting Genius is with sighing sent."
    MILTON.


It is o'er, it is o'er, my reign is o'er;
I hear a Voice, from shore to shore,
From Dunfanaghy to Baltimore,
And it saith, in sad, parsonic tone,
"Great Tithe and Small are dead and gone!"

Even now I behold your vanishing wings,
Ye Tenths of all conceivable things,
Which Adam first, as Doctors deem,
Saw, in a sort of night-mare dream,[1]
After the feast of fruit abhorred--
First indigestion on record!--
Ye decimate ducks, ye chosen chicks,
Ye pigs which, tho' ye be Catholics,
Or of Calvin's most select depraved,
In the Church must have your bacon saved;--
Ye fields, where Labor counts his sheaves,
And, whatsoever _himself_ believes,
Must bow to the Establisht _Church_ belief,
That the tenth is always a _Protestant_ sheaf;--
Ye calves of which the man of Heaven
Takes _Irish_ tithe, one calf in seven;[2]
Ye tenths of rape, hemp, barley, flax,
Eggs, timber, milk, fish and bees' wax;
All things in short since earth's creation,
Doomed, by the Church's dispensation,
To suffer eternal decimation--
Leaving the whole _lay_-world, since then,
Reduced to nine parts out of ten;
Or--as we calculate thefts and arsons--
Just _ten per cent_. the worse for Parsons!

Alas! and is all this wise device
For the saving of souls thus gone in a trice?--
The whole put down, in the simplest way,
By the souls resolving _not_ to pay!
And even the Papist, thankless race
Who have had so much the easiest case--
To _pay_ for our sermons doomed, 'tis true,
But not condemned to _hear them_, too--
(Our holy business being, 'tis known,
With the ears of their barley, not their own,)
Even _they_ object to let us pillage
By right divine their tenth of tillage,
And, horror of horrors, even decline
To find us in sacramental wine![3]

It is o'er, it is o'er, my reign is o'er,
Ah! never shall rosy Rector more,
Like the shepherds of Israel, idly eat,
And make of his flock "a prey and meat."[4]
No more shall be his the pastoral sport
Of suing his flock in the Bishop's Court,
Thro' various steps, Citation, Libel--
_Scriptures_ all, but _not_ the Bible;
Working the Law's whole apparatus,
To get at a few predoomed potatoes,
And summoning all the powers of wig,
To settle the fraction of a pig!--
Till, parson and all committed deep
In the case of "Shepherds _versus_ Sheep,"
The Law usurps the Gospel's place,
And on Sundays meeting face to face,
While Plaintiff fills the preacher's station,
Defendants form the congregation.

So lives he, Mammon's priest, not Heaven's,
For _tenths_ thus all at _sixes_ and _sevens_,
Seeking what parsons love no less
Than tragic poets--a good _distress_.
Instead of studying St. Augustin,
Gregory Nyss., or old St. Justin
(Books fit only to hoard dust in),
His reverence stints his evening readings
To learned Reports of Tithe Proceedings,
Sipping the while that port so ruddy,
Which forms his only _ancient_ study;--
Port so old, you'd swear its tartar
Was of the age of Justin Martyr,
And, had he sipt of such, no doubt
His martyrdom would have been--to gout.

Is all then lost?--alas, too true--
Ye Tenths beloved, adieu, adieu!
My reign is o'er, my reign is o'er--
Like old Thumb's ghost, "I can no more."


[1] A reverend prebendary of Hereford, in an Essay on the Revenues of the
Church of England, has assigned the origin of Tithes to "some unrecorded
revelation made to Adam."

[2] "The tenth calf is due to the parson of common right; and if there are
seven he shall have one."--REES'S _Cyclopaedia_, art. "_Tithes_."

[3] Among the specimens laid before Parliament of the sort of Church rates
levied upon Catholics in Ireland, was a charge of two pipes of port for
sacramental wine.

[4] Ezekiel, xxxiv., 10.--"Neither shall the shepherds feed themselves any
more; for I will deliver my flock from their mouth, that they may not be
meat for them."






THE EUTHANASIA OF VAN.


    "We are told that the bigots are growing old and fast wearing out. If
    it be so why not let us die in peace?"
    --LORD BEXLEY'S _Letter to the Freeholders of Kent_.


Stop, Intellect, in mercy stop,
  Ye curst improvements, cease;
And let poor Nick Vansittart drop
  Into his grave in peace.

Hide, Knowledge, hide thy rising sun,
  Young Freedom, veil thy head;
Let nothing good be thought or done,
  Till Nick Vansittart's dead!

Take pity on a dotard's fears,
  Who much doth light detest;
And let his last few drivelling years
  Be dark as were the rest.

You too, ye fleeting one-pound notes,
  Speed not so fast away--
Ye rags on which old Nicky gloats,
  A few months longer stay.

Together soon, or much I err,
  You _both_ from life may go--
The notes unto the scavenger,
  And Nick--to Nick below.

Ye Liberals, whate'er your plan,
  Be all reforms suspended;
In compliment to dear old Van,
  Let nothing bad be mended.

Ye Papists, whom oppression wrings,
  Your cry politely cease,
And fret your hearts to fiddle-strings
  That Van may die in peace.

So shall he win a fame sublime
  By few old rag-men gained;
Since all shall own, in Nicky's time,
  Nor sense nor justice reigned.

So shall his name thro' ages past,
  And dolts ungotten yet,
Date from "the days of Nicholas,"
  With fond and sad regret;--

And sighing say, "Alas, had he
  "Been spared from Pluto's bowers,
"The blessed reign of Bigotry
  "And Rags might still be ours!"






TO THE REVEREND ----.

ONE OF THE SIXTEEN REQUISITIONISTS OF NOTTINGHAM.

1828.


What, _you_, too, my ******, in hashes so knowing,
  Of sauces and soups Aristarchus profest!
Are _you_, too, my savory Brunswicker, going
  To make an old fool of yourself with the rest?

Far better to stick to your kitchen receipts;
  And--if you want _something_ to tease--for variety,
Go study how Ude, in his "Cookery," treats
  Live eels when he fits them for polisht society.

Just snuggling them in, 'twixt the bars of the fire,
  He leaves them to wriggle and writhe on the coals,[1]
In a manner that Horner himself would admire,
  And wish, 'stead of _eels_, they were Catholic souls.

Ude tells us the fish little suffering feels;
  While Papists of late have more sensitive grown;
So take my advice, try your hand at live eels,
  And for _once_ let the other poor devils alone.

I have even a still better receipt for your cook--
  How to make a goose die of confirmed _hepatitis;_[2]
And if you'll, for once, _fellow_-feelings o'erlook,
  A well-tortured goose a most capital sight is.

First, catch him, alive--make a good steady fire--
  Set your victim before it, both legs being tied,
(As if left to himself he _might_ wish to retire,)
  And place a large bowl of rich cream by his side.

There roasting by inches, dry, fevered, and faint,
  Having drunk all the cream you so civilly laid, off,
He dies of as charming a liver complaint
  As ever sleek person could wish a pie made of.

Besides, only think, my dear one of Sixteen,
  What an emblem this bird, for the epicure's use meant.
Presents of the mode in which Ireland has been
  Made a tid-bit for yours and your brethren's amusement:

Tied down to the stake, while her limbs, as they quiver,
  A slow fire of tyranny wastes by degrees--
No wonder disease should have swelled up her liver,
  No wonder you, Gourmands, should love her disease.


[1] The only way, Monsieur Ude assures us, to get rid of the oil so
objectionable in this fish.

[2] A liver complaint. The process by which the livers of geese are
enlarged for the famous _Pates de foie d'oie_.






IRISH ANTIQUITIES.


According to some learned opinions
The Irish once were Carthaginians;
But trusting to more late descriptions
I'd rather say they were Egyptians.
My reason's this:--the Priests of Isis,
  When forth they marched in long array,
Employed, 'mong other grave devices,
  A Sacred Ass to lead the way;
And still the antiquarian traces
  'Mong Irish Lords this Pagan plan,
For still in all religious cases
  They put Lord Roden in the van.






A CURIOUS FACT.


The present Lord Kenyon (the Peer who writes letters,
For which the waste-paper folks much are his debtors)
Hath one little oddity well worth reciting,
Which puzzleth observers even more than his writing.
Whenever Lord Kenyon doth chance to behold
A cold Apple-pie--mind, the pie _must_ be cold--
His Lordship looks solemn (few people know why),
And he makes a low bow to the said apple-pie.
This idolatrous act in so "vital" a Peer,
Is by most serious Protestants thought rather queer--
Pie-worship, they hold, coming under the head
(Vide _Crustium_, chap, iv.) of the Worship of Bread.
Some think 'tis a tribute, as author he owes
For the service that pie-crust hath done to his prose;--
The only good things in his pages, they swear,
Being those that the pastry-cook sometimes put there.
_Others_ say, 'tis a homage, thro' piecrust conveyed,
To our Glorious Deliverer's much-honored shade;
As that Protestant Hero (or Saint, if you please)
Was as fond of cold pie as he was of green pease,[1]
And 'tis solely in loyal remembrance of that,
My Lord Kenyon to apple-pie takes off his hat.
While others account for this kind salutation;"--
By what Tony Lumpkin calls "concatenation;"
A certain good-will that, from sympathy's ties,
'Twixt old _Apple_-women and _Orange_-men lies.

But 'tis needless to add, these are all vague surmises,
For thus, we're assured, the whole matter arises:
Lord Kenyon's respected old father (like many
Respected old fathers) was fond of a penny;
And loved so to save,[2] that--there's not the least question--
His death was brought on by a bad indigestion,
From cold apple-pie-crust his Lordship _would_ stuff in
At breakfast to save the expense of hot muffin.
Hence it is, and hence only, that cold apple-pies
Are beheld by his Heir with such reverent eyes--
Just as honest King Stephen his beaver might doff
To the fishes that carried his kind uncle off--
And while _filial_ piety urges so many on,
  'Tis pure _apple_-pie-ety moves my Lord Kenyon.


[1] See the anecdote, which the Duchess of Marlborough relates in her
Memoirs, of this polite hero appropriating to himself one day, at dinner,
a whole dish of green peas--the first of the season--while the poor
Princess Anne, who was then in a longing condition, sat by vainly
entreating with her eyes for a share.

[2] The same prudent propensity characterizes his descendant, who (as is
well known) would not even go to the expense of a diphthong on his
father's monument, but had the inscription spelled, economically,
thus:--"_mors janua vita_"






NEW-FASHIONED ECHOES.


Sir,--

Most of your readers are no doubt acquainted with the anecdote told of a
certain not over-wise judge who, when in the act of delivering a charge in
some country court-house, was interrupted by the braying of an ass at the
door. "What noise is that?" asked the angry judge. "Only an extraordinary
_echo_ there is in court, my Lord," answered one of the counsel.

As there are a number of such "extraordinary echoes" abroad just now, you
will not, perhaps, be unwilling, Mr. Editor, to receive the following few
lines suggested by them.

Yours, etc. S.

1828


    _huc coeamus,[1] ait; nullique libentius unquam responsura sono,
    coeamus, retulit echo_.
    OVID.


There are echoes, we know, of all sorts,
  From the echo that "dies in the dale,"
To the "airy-tongued babbler" that sports
  Up the tide of the torrent her "tale."

There are echoes that bore us, like Blues,
  With the latest smart _mot_ they have heard;
There are echoes extremely like shrews
  Letting nobody have the last word.

In the bogs of old Paddy-land, too.
  Certain "talented" echoes[2]  there dwell,
Who on being askt, "How do you do?"
  Politely reply, Pretty well,"

But why should I talk any more
  Of such old-fashioned echoes as these,
When Britain has new ones in store,
  That transcend them by many degrees?

For of all repercussions of sound
  Concerning which bards make a pother,
There's none like that happy rebound
  When one blockhead echoes an other;--

When Kenyon commences the bray,
  And the Borough-Duke follows his track;
And loudly from Dublin's sweet bay
  Rathdowne brays, with interest, back!--

And while, of _most_ echoes the sound
  On our ear by reflection doth fall,
These Brunswickers[3] pass the bray round,
  Without any reflection at all.

Oh Scott, were I gifted like you,
  Who can name all the echoes there are
From Benvoirlich to bold Benvenue,
  From Benledi to wild Uamvar;

I might track thro' each hard Irish name
  The rebounds of this asinine strain,
Till from Neddy to Neddy, it came
  To the _chief_ Neddy, Kenyon, again;

Might tell how it roared in Rathdowne,
  How from Dawson it died off genteelly--
How hollow it hung from the crown
  Of the fat-pated Marquis of Ely;

How on hearing my Lord of Glandine,
  Thistle-eaters the stoutest gave way,
Outdone in their own special line
  By the forty-ass power of his bray!

But, no--for so humble a bard
  'Tis a subject too trying to touch on;
Such noblemen's names are too hard,
  And their noddles too soft to dwell much on.

Oh Echo, sweet nymph of the hill,
  Of the dell and the deep-sounding shelves;
If in spite of Narcissus you still
  Take to fools who are charmed with themselves,

Who knows but, some morning retiring,
  To walk by the Trent's wooded side,
You may meet with Newcastle, admiring
  His own lengthened ears in the tide!

Or, on into Cambria straying,
  Find Kenyon, that double tongued elf,
In his love of _ass_-cendency, braying
  A Brunswick duet with himself!


[1] "Let us from Clubs."

[2] Commonly called "Paddy Blake's Echoes".

[3] Anti-Catholic associations, under the title of Brunswick Clubs, were
at this time becoming numerous both in England and Ireland.






INCANTATION.

FROM THE NEW TRAGEDY OF "THE BRUNSWICKERS."


SCENE.--_Penenden Plain. In the middle, a caldron boiling. Thunder.--
Enter three Brunswickers_.

  _1st Bruns_.--Thrice hath scribbling Kenyon scrawled,

  _2d Bruns_.--Once hath fool Newcastle bawled,

  _3d Bruns_.--Bexley snores:--'tis time, 'tis time,

  _1st Bruns_.--Round about the caldron go;
In the poisonous nonsense throw.
Bigot spite that long hath grown
Like a toad within a stone,
Sweltering in the heart of Scott,
Boil we in the Brunswick pot.

  _All_.--Dribble, dribble, nonsense dribble,
Eldon, talk, and Kenyon, scribble.

  _2d Bruns_.--Slaver from Newcastle's quill
In the noisome mess distil,
Brimming high our Brunswick broth
Both with venom and with froth.
Mix the brains (tho' apt to hash ill,
Being scant) of Lord Mountcashel,
With that malty stuff which Chandos
Drivels as no other man does.
Catch (_i. e._ if catch you can)
One idea, spick and span,
From my Lord of Salisbury,--
One idea, tho' it be
Smaller than the "happy flea"
Which his sire in sonnet terse
Wedded to immortal verse.[1]
Tho' to rob the son is sin,
Put his _one_ idea in;
And, to keep it company,
Let that conjuror Winchelsea
Drop but _half_ another there,
If he hath so much to spare.
Dreams of murders and of arsons,
Hatched in heads of Irish parsons,
Bring from every hole and corner,
Where ferocious priests like Horner
Purely for religious good
Cry aloud for Papist's blood,
Blood for Wells, and such old women,
At their ease to wade and swim in.

  _All_.--Dribble, dribble, nonsense dribble,
Bexley, talk, and Kenyon, scribble.

  _3d Bruns_.--Now the charm begin to brew;
Sisters, sisters, add thereto
Scraps of Lethbridge's old speeches,
Mixt with leather from his breeches,
Rinsings of old Bexley's brains,
Thickened (if you'll take the pains)
With that pulp which rags create,
In their middle _nympha_ state,
Ere, like insects frail and sunny,
Forth they wing abroad as money.
There--the Hell-broth we've enchanted--
Now but _one_ thing more is wanted.
Squeeze o'er all that Orange juice,
Castlereagh keeps corkt for use,
Which, to work the better spell, is
Colored deep with blood of ----,
Blood, of powers far more various,
Even than that of Januarius,
Since so great a charm hangs o'er it,
England's parsons bow before it,
  _All_.--Dribble, dribble, nonsense dribble,
Bexley, talk, and Kenyon, scribble.
  _2d Bruns_.--Cool it now with ----'s blood,
So the charm is firm and good.
 [_exeunt_.


[1] Alluding to a well-known lyric composition of the late Marquis, which,
with a slight alteration, might be addressed either to a flea or a fly.






HOW TO MAKE A GOOD POLITICIAN.


Whene'er you're in doubt, said a Sage I once knew,
'Twixt two lines of conduct _which_ course to pursue,
Ask a woman's advice, and, whate'er she advise,
Do the very reverse and you're sure to be wise.

Of the same use as guides the Brunswicker throng;
In their thoughts, words and deeds, so instinctively wrong,
That whatever they counsel, act, talk or indite,
Take the opposite course and you're sure to be right.

So golden this rule, that, had nature denied you
The use of that finger-post, Reason, to guide you--
Were you even more doltish than any given man is,
More soft than Newcastle, more twaddling than Van is.
I'd stake my repute, on the following conditions,
To make you the soundest of sound politicians.

Place yourself near the skirts of some high-flying Tory--
Some Brunswicker parson, of port-drinking glory,--
Watch well how he dines, during any great Question--
What makes him feel gayly, what spoils his digestion--
And always feel sure that _his_ joy o'er a stew
Portends a clear case of dyspepsia to _you_.
Read him backwards, like Hebrew--whatever he wishes
Or praises, note down as absurd or pernicious.
Like the folks of a weather-house, shifting about,
When he's _out_ be an _In_-when he's _in_ be an _Out_.
Keep him always reversed in your thoughts, night and day,
Like an Irish barometer turned the wrong way:--
If he's _up_ you may swear that foul weather is nigh;
If he's _down_ you may look for a bit of blue sky.
Never mind what debaters or journalists say,
Only ask what _he_ thinks and then think t'other way.
Does he hate the Small-note Bill? then firmly rely
The Small-note Bill's a blessing, tho' _you_ don't know why.
Is Brougham his aversion? then Harry's your man.
Does he quake at O'Connell? take doubly to Dan.
Is he all for the Turks? then at once take the whole
Russian Empire (Tsar, Cossacks and all) to your soul.
In short, whatsoever he talks, thinks or is,
Be your thoughts, words and essence the contrast of his.
Nay, as Siamese ladies--at least the polite ones,--
All paint their teeth black, 'cause the devil has white ones-
If even by the chances of time or of tide
Your Tory for once should have sense on his side,
Even _then_ stand aloof--for be sure that Old Nick
When a Tory talks sensibly, means you some trick.

Such my recipe is--and, in one single verse,
I shall now, in conclusion, its substance rehearse,
Be all that a Brunswicker _is_ not nor _could_ be,
And then--youll be all that an honest man should be.






EPISTLE OF CONDOLENCE.

FROM A SLAVE-LORD, TO A COTTON-LORD.


Alas! my dear friend, what a state of affairs!
  How unjustly we both are despoiled of our rights!
Not a pound of black flesh shall I leave to my heirs,
  Nor must you any more work to death little whites.

Both forced to submit to that general controller
  Of King, Lords and cotton mills, Public Opinion,
No more shall _you_ beat with a big billy-roller.
  Nor _I_ with the cart-whip assert my dominion.

Whereas, were we suffered to do as we please
  With our Blacks and our Whites, as of yore we were let,
We might range them alternate, like harpsichord keys,
  And between us thump out a good piebald duet.

But this fun is all over;--farewell to the zest
  Which Slavery now lends to each teacup we sip;
Which makes still the cruellest coffee the best,
  And that sugar the sweetest which smacks of the whip.

Farewell too the Factory's white pickaninnies--
  Small, living machines which if flogged to their tasks
Mix so well with their namesakes, the "Billies" and "Jennies,"
  That _which_ have got souls in 'em nobody asks;--

Little Maids of the Mill, who themselves but ill-fed,
  Are obliged, 'mong their other benevolent cares,
To "keep feeding the scribblers,"[1]--and better, 'tis said,
  Than old Blackwood or Fraser have ever fed theirs.

All this is now o'er and so dismal _my_ loss is,
  So hard 'tis to part from the smack of the throng,
That I mean (from pure love for the old whipping process),
  To take to whipt syllabub all my life long.


[1] One of the operations in cotton mills usually performed by children.






THE GHOST OF MILTIADES.


    _ah quoties dubies Scriptis exarsit amator_.
    OVID.


The Ghost of Miltiades came at night,
And he stood by the bed of the Benthamite,
And he said, in a voice that thrilled the frame,
"If ever the sound of Marathon's name
  Hath fired thy blood or flusht thy brow,
"Lover of Liberty, rouse thee now!"

The Benthamite yawning left his bed--
Away to the Stock Exchange he sped,
And he found the Scrip of Greece so high,
That it fired his blood, it flusht his eye,
And oh! 'twas a sight for the Ghost to see,
For never was Greek more Greek than he!
And still as the premium higher went,
His ecstasy rose--so much _per cent_.
(As we see in a glass that tells the weather
The heat and the _silver_ rise together,)
And Liberty sung from the patriot's lip,
While a voice from his pocket whispered "Scrip!"
The Ghost of Miltiades came again;--
He smiled, as the pale moon smiles thro' rain,
For his soul was glad at that patriot strain;
(And poor, dear ghost--how little he knew
The jobs and the tricks of the Philhellene crew!)
"Blessings and thanks!" was all he said,
Then melting away like a night-dream fled!

The Benthamite hears--amazed that ghosts
Could be such fools--and away he posts,
A patriot still? Ah no, ah no--
Goddess of Freedom, thy Scrip is low,
And warm and fond as thy lovers are,
Thou triest their passion, when under _par_,
The Benthamite's ardor fast decays,
By turns he weeps and swears and prays.
And wishes the devil had Crescent and Cross,
Ere _he_ had been forced to sell at a loss.
They quote him the Stock of various nations,
But, spite of his classic associations,
Lord! how he loathes the Greek _quotations_!

"Who'll buy my Scrip? Who'll buy my Scrip?"
Is now the theme of the patriot's lip,
As he runs to tell how hard his lot is
To Messrs. Orlando and Luriottis,
And says, "Oh Greece, for Liberty's sake,
"Do buy my Scrip, and I vow to break
"Those dark, unholy _bonds_ of thine--
"If you'll only consent to buy up _mine_!"
The Ghost of Miltiades came once more;--
His brow like the night was lowering o'er,
And he said, with a look that flasht dismay,
"Of Liberty's foes the worst are they,
"Who turn to a trade her cause divine,
"And gamble for gold on Freedom's shrine!"
Thus saying, the Ghost, as he took his flight,
Gave a Parthian kick to the Benthamite,
Which sent him, whimpering, off to Jerry--
And vanisht away to the Stygian ferry!






ALARMING INTELLIGENCE!

REVOLUTION IN THE DICTIONARY--ONE _GALT_ AT THE HEAD OF IT.


God preserve us!--there's nothing now safe from assault;--
  Thrones toppling around, churches brought to the hammer;
And accounts have just reached us that one Mr. _Galt_
  Has declared open war against English and Grammar!

He had long been suspected of some such design,
  And, the better his wicked intents to arrive at,
Had lately 'mong Colburn's troops of _the line_
  (The penny-a-line men) enlisted as private.

There schooled, with a rabble of words at command,
  Scotch, English and slang in promiscuous alliance.
He at length against Syntax has taken his stand,
  And sets all the Nine Parts of Speech at defiance.

Next advices, no doubt, further facts will afford:
  In the mean time the danger most imminent grows,
He has taken the Life of one eminent Lord,
  And whom he'll _next_ murder the Lord only knows.

_Wednesday evening_.
Since our last, matters, luckily, look more serene;
  Tho' the rebel, 'tis stated, to aid his defection,
Has seized a great Powder--no, Puff Magazine,
  And the explosions are dreadful in every direction.

What his meaning exactly is, nobody knows,
  As he talks (in a strain of intense botheration)
Of lyrical "ichor,"[1] "gelatinous" prose,[2]
  And a mixture called amber immortalization.[3]

_Now_, he raves of a bard he once happened to meet,
Seated high "among rattlings" and churning a sonnet;[4]
_Now_, talks of a mystery, wrapt in a sheet,
  With a halo (by way of a nightcap) upon it![5]

We shudder in tracing these terrible lines;
  Something bad they must mean, tho' we can't make it out;
For whate'er may be guessed of Galt's secret designs,
  That they're all _Anti_-English no Christian can doubt.


[1] "That dark disease ichor which colored her effusions."--GALT'S _Life
of Byron_.

[2] "The gelatinous character of their effusions." _Ibid_.

[3] "The poetical embalmment or rather amber immortalization."--
_Ibid_.

[4] "Sitting amidst the shrouds and rattlings, churning an inarticulate
melody."--_Ibid_.

[5] "He was a mystery in a winding sheet, crowned with a halo."--
_Ibid_.






RESOLUTIONS

PASSED AT A LATE MEETING OF REVERENDS AND RIGHT REVERENDS.


Resolved--to stick to every particle
Of every Creed and every Article;
Reforming naught, or great or little,
We'll stanchly stand by every tittle,
And scorn the swallow of that soul
Which cannot boldly bolt the whole.[1]
Resolved that tho' St. Athanasius
In damning souls is rather spacious--
Tho' wide and far his curses fall,
Our Church "hath stomach for them all;"
And those who're not content with such,
May e'en be damned ten times as much.

Resolved--such liberal souls are we--
Tho' hating Nonconformity,
We yet believe the cash no worse is
That comes from Nonconformist purses.
Indifferent _whence_ the money reaches
The pockets of our reverend breeches,
To us the Jumper's jingling penny
Chinks with a tone as sweet as any;
And even our old friends Yea and Nay
May thro' the nose for ever pray,
If _also_ thro' the nose they'll pay.

Resolved that Hooper,[2] Latimer,[3]
And Cranmer,[4] all extremely err,
In taking such a low-bred view
Of what Lords Spiritual ought to do:--
All owing to the fact, poor men,
That Mother Church was modest then,
Nor knew what golden eggs her goose,
The Public, would in time produce.
One Pisgah peep at modern Durham
To far more lordly thoughts would stir 'em.

Resolved that when we Spiritual Lords
Whose income just enough affords
To keep our Spiritual Lordships cosey,
Are told by Antiquarians prosy
How ancient Bishops cut up theirs,
Giving the poor the largest shares--
Our answer is, in one short word,
We think it pious but absurd.
Those good men made the world their debtor,
But we, the Church reformed, know better;
And taking all that all can pay,
Balance the account the other way.

Resolved our thanks profoundly due are
To last month's Quarterly Reviewer,
Who proves by arguments so clear
(One sees how much he holds _per_ year)
That England's Church, tho' out of date,
Must still be left to lie in state,
As dead, as rotten and as grand as
The mummy of King Osymandyas,
All pickled snug--the brains drawn out--
With costly cerements swathed about,--
And "Touch me not," those words terrific,
Scrawled o'er her in good hieroglyphic.


[1] One of the questions propounded to the Puritans in 1573 was--"Whether
the Book of Service was good and godly, every tittle grounded on the Holy
Scripture?" On which an honest Dissenter remarks--"Surely they had a
wonderful opinion of their Service Book that there was not a _tittle_
amiss, in it."

[2] "They," the Bishops, "know that the primitive Church had no such
Bishops. If the fourth part of the bishopric remained unto the Bishop, it
were sufficient."--_On the Commandments_, p. 72.

[3] "Since the Prelates were made Lords and Nobles, the plough standeth,
there is no work done, the people starve."--_Lat. Serm_.

[4] "Of whom have come all these glorious titles, styles, and pomps into
the Church. But I would that I, and all my brethren, the Bishops, would
leave all our styles, and write the styles of our offices," etc.--_Life
of Cranmer, by Strype, Appendix_.






SIR ANDREW'S DREAM.


    "_nec tu sperne piis venientia somnia portis:
    cum pia venerunt somnia, pondus liubent_."
    PROPERT. _lib. iv. eleg_. 7.


As snug, on a Sunday eve, of late,
In his easy chair Sir Andrew sate,
Being much too pious, as every one knows,
To do aught, of a Sunday eve, but doze,
He dreamt a dream, dear, holy man,
And I'll tell you his dream as well as I can.
He found himself, to his great amaze,
In Charles the First's high Tory days,
And just at the time that gravest of Courts
Had publisht its Book of Sunday Sports.[1]

_Sunday_ Sports! what a thing for the ear
Of Andrew even in sleep to hear!--
It chanced to be too a Sabbath day
When the people from church were coming away;
And Andrew with horror heard this song.
As the smiling sinners flockt along;--
"Long life to the Bishops, hurrah! hurrah!
"For a week of work and a Sunday of play
"Make the poor man's life run merry away."

"The Bishops!" quoth Andrew, "Popish, I guess,"
And he grinned with conscious holiness.
But the song went on, and, to brim the cup
Of poor Andy's grief, the fiddles struck up!

"Come, take out the lasses--let's have a dance--
  "For the Bishops allow us to skip our fill,
"Well knowing that no one's the more in advance
  "On the road to heaven, for standing still.
"Oh! it never was meant that grim grimaces
  "Should sour the cream of a creed of love;
"Or that fellows with long, disastrous faces,
  "Alone should sit among cherubs above.
    "Then hurrah for the Bishops, etc.

"For Sunday fun we never can fail,
  "When the Church herself each sport points out;--
"There's May-games, archery, Whitsun-ale,
  "And a May-pole high to dance about.
"Or should we be for a pole hard driven,
  "Some lengthy saint of aspect fell,
"With his pockets on earth and his nose in heaven,
  "Will do for a May-pole just as well.
"Then hurrah for the Bishops, hurrah! hurrah!
"A week of work and a Sabbath of play
"Make the poor man's life run merry away."

To Andy, who doesn't much deal in history,
This Sunday scene was a downright mystery;
And God knows where might have ended the joke,
But, in trying to stop the fiddles, he woke,
And the odd thing is (as the rumor goes)
That since that dream--which, one would suppose,
Should have made his godly stomach rise.
Even more than ever 'gainst Sunday pies--
He has viewed things quite with different eyes;
Is beginning to take, on matters divine,
Like Charles and his Bishops, the _sporting_ line--
Is all for Christians jigging in pairs,
As an interlude 'twixt Sunday prayers:--
Nay, talks of getting Archbishop Howley
To bring in a Bill enacting duly
That all good Protestants from this date
May freely and lawfully recreate,
Of a Sunday eve, their spirits moody,
With Jack in the Straw or Punch and Judy.


[1] _The Book of Sports_ drawn up by Bishop Moreton was first put forth in
the reign of James I., 1618, and afterwards republished, at the advice of
Laud, by Charles I., 1633, with an injunction that it should be "made
public by order from the Bishops." We find it therein declared, that "for
his good people's recreation, his Majesty's pleasure was, that after the
end of divine service they should not be disturbed, letted, or discouraged
from any lawful recreations, such as dancing, either of men or women,
archery for men, leaping, vaulting, or any such harmless recreations, nor
having of May-games, Whitsun-ales, or Morris-dances, or setting up of May
poles, or other sports therewith used." etc.






A BLUE LOVE SONG.

TO MISS-----.


Air-"_Come live with me and be my love_."


Come wed with me and we will write,
My Blue of Blues, from morn till night.
Chased from our classic souls shall be
All thoughts of vulgar progeny;
And thou shalt walk through smiling rows
Of chubby duodecimos,
While I, to match thy products nearly,
Shall lie-in of a quarto yearly.
'Tis true, even books entail some trouble;
But _live_ productions give one double.

Correcting children is _such_ bother,--
While printers' devils correct the other.
Just think, my own Malthusian dear,
How much more decent 'tis to hear
From male or female--as it may be--
"How is your book?" than "How's your baby?"
And whereas physic and wet nurses
Do much exhaust paternal purses,
Our books if rickety may go
And be well dry-nurst in _the Row_;
And when God wills to take them hence,
Are buried at _the Row's_ expense.

Besides, (as 'tis well proved by thee,
In thy own Works, vol. 93.)
The march, just now, of population
So much outscrips all moderation,
That even prolific herring-shoals
Keep pace not with our erring souls.[1]
Oh far more proper and well-bred
To stick to writing books instead;
And show the world how two Blue lovers
Can coalesce, like two book-covers,
(Sheep-skin, or calf, or such wise leather,)
Lettered at back and stitched together
Fondly as first the binder fixt 'em,
With naught but--literature betwixt 'em.


[1] See "Ella of Garveloch."--Garveloch being a place where there
was a large herring-fishery, but where, as we are told by the author, "the
people increased much faster than the produce."






SUNDAY ETHICS.

A SCOTCH ODE.


Puir, profligate Londoners, having heard tell
  That the De'il's got amang ye, and fearing 'tis true,
We ha' sent ye a mon wha's a match for his spell,
A chiel o' our ain, that the De'il himsel
  Will be glad to keep clear of, ane Andrew Agnew.

So at least ye may reckon for one day entire
  In ilka lang week ye'll be tranquil eneugh,
As Auld Nick, do him justice, abhors a Scotch squire,
An' would sooner gae roast by his ain kitchen fire
  Than pass a hale Sunday wi' Andrew Agnew.

For, bless the gude mon, gin he had his ain way,
  He'd na let a cat on the Sabbath say "mew;"
Nae birdie maun whistle, nae lambie maun play,
An Phoebus himsel could na travel that day.
  As he'd find a new Joshua in Andie Agnew.

Only hear, in your Senate, how awfu' he cries,
  "Wae, wae to a' sinners who boil an' who stew!
"Wae, wae to a' eaters o' Sabbath baked pies,
"For as surely again shall the crust thereof rise
  "In judgment against ye," saith Andrew Agnew!

Ye may think, from a' this, that our Andie's the lad
  To ca' o'er the coals your nobeelity too;
That their drives, o' a Sunday, wi' flunkies,[1] a' clad
Like Shawmen, behind 'em, would mak the mon mad--
  But he's nae sic a noodle, our Andie Agnew.

If Lairds an' fine Ladies, on Sunday, think right
  To gang to the deevil--as maist o' 'em do--
To stop them our Andie would think na polite;
And 'tis odds (if the chiel could get onything by't)
  But he'd follow 'em, booing, would Andrew Agnew.


[1] Servants in livery.






AWFUL EVENT.


Yes, Winchelsea (I tremble while I pen it),
Winehelsea's Earl hath _cut_ the British Senate--
Hath said to England's Peers, in accent gruff,
  "_That_ for ye all"[snapping his fingers] and exit in a huff!

Disastrous news!--like that of old which spread,
From shore to shore, "our mighty Pan is dead,"
O'er the cross benches (cross from _being_ crost)
Sounds the loud wail, "Our Winchelsea is lost!"

Which of ye, Lords, that heard him can forget
The deep impression of that awful threat,
"I quit your house!!"--midst all that histories tell,
I know but _one_ event that's parallel:--

It chanced at Drury Lane, one Easter night,
When the gay gods too blest to be polite
Gods at their ease, like those of learned Lucretius,
Laught, whistled, groaned, uproariously facetious--
A well-drest member of the middle gallery,
Whose "ears polite" disdained such low canaillerie,
Rose in his place--so grand, you'd almost swear
Lord Winchelsea himself stood towering there--
And like that Lord of dignity and _nous_,
Said, "Silence, fellows, or--I'll leave the house!!"

How brookt the gods this speech? Ah well-a-day,
That speech so fine should be so thrown away!
In vain did this mid-gallery grandee
Assert his own two-shilling dignity--
In vain he menaced to withdraw the ray
Of his own full-price countenance away--
Fun against Dignity is fearful odds,
And as the Lords laugh _now_, so giggled _then_ the gods!






THE NUMBERING OF THE CLERGY.

PARODY ON SIR CHARLES HAN. WILLIAMS'S FAMOUS ODE,
"COME, CLOE, and GIVE ME SWEET KISSES."


    "We want more Churches and more Clergymen."
    _Bishop of London's late Charge_.


    _"rectorum numerum, terris pereuntibus augent."
    Claudian in Eutrop_.


Come, give us more Livings and Rectors,
  For, richer no realm ever gave;
But why, ye unchristian objectors,
  Do ye ask us how many we crave?[1]

Oh there can't be too many rich Livings
  For souls of the Pluralist kind,
Who, despising old Crocker's misgivings,
  To numbers can ne'er be confined.[2]

Count the cormorants hovering about,[3]
  At the time their fish season sets in,
When these models of keen diners-out
  Are preparing their beaks to begin.

Count the rooks that, in clerical dresses,
  Flock round when the harvest's in play,
And not minding the farmer's distresses,
  Like devils in grain peck away.

Go, number the locusts in heaven,[4]
  On the way to some titheable shore;
And when so many Parsons you've given,
  We still shall be craving for more.

Then, unless ye the Church would submerge, ye
  Must leave us in peace to augment.
For the wretch who could number the Clergy,
  With few will be ever content.


[1]
Come, Cloe, and give me sweet kisses,
  For sweeter sure never girl gave;
But why, in the midst of my blisses,
  Do you ask me how many I'd have?

[2]
For whilst I love thee above measure,
To numbers I'll ne'er be confined.

[3]
Count the bees that on Hybla are playing,
  Count the flowers that enamel its fields,
Count the flocks, etc.

[4]
Go number the stars in the heaven,
  Count how many sands on the shore,
When so many kisses you've given,
  I still shall be craving for more.






A SAD CASE.


    "If it be the undergraduate season at which this _rabies
    religiosa_ is to be so fearful, what security has Mr. Goulburn
    against it at this moment, when his son is actually exposed to the
    full venom of an association with Dissenters?"
    --_The Times_, March 25.


How sad a case!--just think of it--
If Goulburn junior should be bit
By some insane Dissenter, roaming
Thro' Granta's halls, at large and foaming,
And with that aspect _ultra_ crabbed
Which marks Dissenters when they're rabid!
God only knows what mischiefs might
Result from this one single bite,
Or how the venom, once suckt in,
Might spread and rage thro' kith and kin.
Mad folks of all denominations
First turn upon their own relations:
So that _one_ Goulburn, fairly bit,
Might end in maddening the whole kit,
Till ah! ye gods! we'd have to rue
Our Goulburn senior bitten too;
The Hychurchphobia in those veins,
Where Tory blood now redly reigns;--
And that dear man who now perceives
Salvation only in lawn sleeves,
Might, tainted by such coarse infection,
Run mad in the opposite direction.
And think, poor man, 'tis only given
To linsey-woolsey to reach Heaven!

Just fancy what a shock 'twould be
Our Goulburn in his fits to see,
Tearing into a thousand particles
His once-loved Nine and Thirty Articles;
(Those Articles his friend, the Duke,[1]
For Gospel, t'other night, mistook;)
Cursing cathedrals, deans and singers--
Wishing the ropes might hang the ringers--
Pelting the church with blasphemies,
Even worse than Parson Beverley's;--
And ripe for severing Church and State,
Like any creedless reprobate,
Or like that class of Methodists
Prince Waterloo styles "Atheists!"

But 'tis too much--the Muse turns pale,
And o'er the picture drops a veil,
Praying, God save the Goulburns all
From mad Dissenters great and small!


[1] The Duke of Wellington, who styled them "the Articles of
Christianity."






A DREAM OF HINDOSTAN.


    --risum _tenaetis, amici_


"The longer one lives, the more one learns,"
  Said I, as off to sleep I went,
Bemused with thinking of Tithe concerns,
And reading a book by the Bishop of FERNS,[1]
  On the Irish Church Establishment.
But lo! in sleep not long I lay,
  When Fancy her usual tricks began,
And I found myself bewitched away
  To a goodly city in Hindostan--
A city where he who dares to dine
  On aught but rice is deemed a sinner;
Where sheep and kine are held divine,
  And accordingly--never drest for dinner.

"But how is this?" I wondering cried--
As I walkt that city fair and wide,
And saw, in every marble street,
  A row of beautiful butchers' shops--
"What means, for men who don't eat meat,
  "This grand display of loins and chops?"
In vain I askt--'twas plain to see
That nobody dared to answer me.

So on from street to street I strode:
And you can't conceive how vastly odd
  The butchers lookt--a roseate crew,
Inshrined in _stalls_ with naught to do;
While some on a _bench_, half dozing, sat,
And the Sacred Cows were not more fat.
Still posed to think what all this scene
Of sinecure trade was _meant_ to mean,
"And, pray," askt I--"by whom is paid
The expense of this strange masquerade?"--
"The expense!--oh! that's of course defrayed
(Said one of these well-fed Hecatombers)
"By yonder rascally rice-consumers."
"What! _they_ who mustn't eat meat!"--
    No matter--
(And while he spoke his cheeks grew fatter,)
"The rogues may munch their _Paddy_ crop,
"But the rogues must still support _our_ shop,
"And depend upon it, the way to treat
  "Heretical stomachs that thus dissent,
"Is to burden all that won't eat meat,
  "With a costly MEAT ESTABLISHMENT."

On hearing these words so gravely said,
  With a volley of laughter loud I shook,
And my slumber fled and my dream was sped,
And I found I was lying snug in bed,
  With my nose in the Bishop of FERNS'S book.


[1] An indefatigable scribbler of anti-Catholic pamphlets.




THE BRUNSWICK CLUB.


A letter having been addressed to a very distinguished personage,
requesting him to become the Patron of this Orange Club, a polite answer
was forthwith returned, of which we have been fortunate enough to obtain a
copy.


_Brimstone-hall, September 1, 1828_.

_Private_,--Lord Belzebub presents
To the Brunswick Club his compliments.
And much regrets to say that he
Can not at present their Patron be.
In stating this, Lord Belzebub
Assures on his honor the Brunswick Club,
That 'tisn't from any lukewarm lack
Of zeal or fire he thus holds back--
As even Lord _Coal_ himself is not[1]
For the Orange party more red-hot:
But the truth is, still their Club affords
A somewhat decenter show of Lords,
And on its list of members gets
A few less rubbishy Baronets,
Lord Belzebub must beg to be
Excused from keeping such company.

Who the devil, he humbly begs to know,
Are Lord Glandine, and Lord Dunlo?
Or who, with a grain of sense, would go
To sit and be bored by Lord Mayo?
What living creature--_except his nurse_--
For Lord Mountcashel cares a curse,
Or think 'twould matter if Lord Muskerry
Were 'tother side of the Stygian ferry?
Breathes there a man in Dublin town,
Who'd give but half of half-a-crown
To save from drowning my Lord Rathdowne,
Or who wouldn't also gladly hustle in
Lords Roden, Bandon, Cole and Jocelyn?
In short, tho' from his tenderest years,
Accustomed to all sorts of Peers,
Lord Belzebub much questions whether
He ever yet saw mixt together
As 'twere in one capacious tub.
Such a mess of noble silly-bub
As the twenty Peers of the Brunswick Club.
'Tis therefore impossible that Lord B.
Could stoop to such society,
Thinking, he owns (tho' no great prig),
For one in his station 'twere _infra dig_.
But he begs to propose, in the interim
(Till they find some properer Peers for him),
His Highness of Cumberland, as _Sub_
To take his place at the Brunswick Club--
Begging, meanwhile, himself to dub
Their obedient servant,
  BELZEBUB.

It luckily happens, the Royal Duke
Resembles so much, in air and look,
The head of the Belzebub family,
That few can any difference see;
Which makes him of course the better suit
To serve as Lord B.'s substitute.


[1] Usually written Cole.






PROPOSALS FOR A GYNAECOCRACY.

ADDRESSED TO A LATE RADICAL MEETING.


    --"_quas ipsa decus sibi dia Camilla
    delegit pacisque bonas bellique ministras_."
    VERGIL.


As Whig Reform has had its range,
  And none of us are yet content,
Suppose, my friends, by way of change,
  We try a _Female Parliament_;
And since of late with _he_ M.P.'s
We've fared so badly, take to she's--
Petticoat patriots, flounced John Russells,
Burdetts in _blonde_ and Broughams in _bustles_.

The plan is startling, I confess--
But 'tis but an affair of dress;
Nor see I much there is to choose
  'Twixt Ladies (so they're thorough-bred ones)
In ribands of all sorts of hues,
  Or Lords in only blue or red ones.

At least the fiddlers will be winners,
  Whatever other trade advances
As then, instead of Cabinet dinners
  We'll have, at Almack's, Cabinet dances;
Nor let this world's important questions
Depend on Ministers' digestions.

If Ude's receipts have done things ill,
  To Weippert's band they may go better;
There's Lady **, in one quadrille,
  Would settle Europe, if you'd let her:
And who the deuce or asks or cares
  When Whigs or Tories have undone 'em,
Whether they've _danced_ thro' State affairs,
  Or simply, dully, _dined_ upon 'em?

Hurrah then for the Petticoats!
To them we pledge our free-born votes;
We'll have all _she_, and only _she_--
  Pert blues shall act as "best debaters,"
Old dowagers our Bishops be,
  And termagants our agitators.
If Vestris to oblige the nation
  Her own Olympus will abandon
And help to prop the Administration,
  It _can't_ have better legs to stand on.
The famed Macaulay (Miss) shall show
  Each evening, forth in learned oration;
Shall move (midst general cries of "Oh!")
  For full returns of population:
And finally to crown the whole,
The Princess Olive, Royal soul,[1]
Shall from her bower in Banco Regis,
Descend to bless her faithful lieges,
And mid our Union's loyal chorus
Reign jollily for ever o'er us.


[1] A personage so styled herself who attained considerable notoriety at
that period.






TO THE EDITOR OF THE * * *.


Sir,

Having heard some rumors respecting the strange and awful visitation under
which Lord Henley has for some time past been suffering, in consequence of
his declared hostility to "anthems, solos, duets,"[1] etc., I took the
liberty of making inquiries at his Lordship's house this morning and lose
no time in transmitting to you such particulars as I could collect. It is
said that the screams of his Lordship, under the operation of this nightly
concert, (which is no doubt some trick of the Radicals), may be heard all
over the neighborhood. The female who personates St. Cecilia is supposed
to be the same that last year appeared in the character of Isis at the
Rotunda. How the cherubs are managed, I have not yet ascertained.

Yours, etc.

P. P.

[1] In a work, on Church Reform, published by his Lordship in 1832.






LORD HENLEY AND ST. CECILIA


    --_in Metii decenaat Judicis aures_.
    HORAT.


As snug in his bed Lord Henley lay,
  Revolving much his own renown,
And hoping to add thereto a ray
  By putting duets and anthems down,

Sudden a strain of choral sounds
  Mellifluous o'er his senses stole;
Whereat the Reformer muttered "Zounds!"
  For he loathed sweet music with all his soul.

Then starting up he saw a sight
  That well might shock so learned a snorer--
Saint Cecilia robed in light
  With a portable organ slung before her.

And round were Cherubs on rainbow wings,
  Who, his Lordship feared, might tire of flitting,
So begged they'd sit--but ah! poor things,
  They'd, none of them, got the means of sitting.

"Having heard," said the Saint, "you're fond of hymns,
  "And indeed that musical snore betrayed you,
"Myself and my choir of cherubims
  "Are come for a while to serenade you."

In vain did the horrified Henley say
  "'Twas all a mistake--she was misdirected;"
And point to a concert over the way
  Where fiddlers and angels were expected.

In vain--the Saint could see in his looks
  (She civilly said) much tuneful lore;
So at once all opened their music-books,
  And herself and her Cherubs set off at score.

All night duets, terzets, quartets,
  Nay, long quintets most dire to hear;
Ay, and old motets and canzonets
  And glees in sets kept boring his ear.

He tried to sleep--but it wouldn't do;
  So loud they squalled, he _must_ attend to 'em.
Tho' Cherubs' songs to his cost he knew
  Were like themselves and had no end to 'em.

Oh judgment dire on judges bold,
  Who meddle with music's sacred strains!
Judge Midas tried the same of old
  And was punisht like Henley for his pains.

But worse on the modern judge, alas!
  Is the sentence launched from Apollo's throne;
For Midas was given the ears of an ass,
  While Henley is doomed to keep his own!






ADVERTISEMENT.[1]

1830.


Missing or lost, last Sunday night,
  A Waterloo coin whereon was traced
The inscription, "Courage!" in letters bright,
  Tho' a little by rust of years defaced.

The metal thereof is rough and hard,
  And ('tis thought of late) mixt up with brass;
But it bears the stamp of Fame's award,
  And thro' all Posterity's hands will pass.

_How_ it was lost God only knows,
  But certain _City_ thieves, they say,
Broke in on the owner's evening doze,
  And filched this "gift of gods" away!

One ne'er could, of course, the Cits suspect,
  If we hadn't that evening chanced to see,
At the robbed man's door a _Mare_ elect
  With an ass to keep her company.

Whosoe'er of this lost treasure knows,
  Is begged to state all facts about it,
As the owner can't well face his foes,
  Nor even his friends just now without it.

And if Sir Clod will bring it back,
  Like a trusty Baronet, wise and able,
He shall have a ride on the whitest hack[2]
  That's left in old King George's stable.


[1] Written at that memorable crisis when a distinguished duke, then Prime
Minister, acting under the inspirations of Sir Claudius Hunter, and other
City worthies, advised his Majesty to give up his announced intention of
dining with the Lord Mayor.

[2] Among other remarkable attributes by which Sir Claudius distinguished
himself, the dazzling whiteness of his favorite steed vas not the least
conspicuous.






MISSING.

Carlton Terrace, 1832.


Whereas, Lord ---- de ----
Left his home last Saturday,
And, tho' inquired for round and round
Thro' certain purlieus, can't be found;
And whereas, none can solve our queries
As to where this virtuous Peer is,
Notice is hereby given that all
May forthwith to inquiring fall,
As, once the thing's well set about,
No doubt but we shall hunt him out.

His Lordship's mind, of late, they say,
Hath been in an uneasy way,
Himself and colleagues not being let
To climb into the Cabinet,
To settle England's state affairs,
Hath much, it seems, _un_settled theirs;
And chief to this stray Plenipo
Hath been a most distressing blow.
Already,-certain to receive a
Well-paid mission to the Neva,
And be the bearer of kind words
To tyrant Nick from Tory Lords,-
To fit himself for free discussion,
His Lordship had been learning Russian;
And all so natural to him were
The accents of the Northern bear,
That while his tones were in your ear, you
Might swear you were in sweet Siberia.
And still, poor Peer, to old and young,
He goes on raving in that tongue;
Tells you how much you would enjoy a
Trip to Dalnodubrovrkoya;[1]
Talks of such places by the score on
As Oulisflirmchinagoboron,[2]
And swears (for he at nothing sticks)
That Russia swarms with Raskolniks,
Tho' _one_ such Nick, God knows, must be
A more than ample quantity.

Such are the marks by which to know
This strayed or stolen Plenipo;
And whosoever brings or sends
The unhappy statesman to his friends
On Carlton Terrace, shall have thanks,
And--any paper but the Bank's.

P.S.--Some think the disappearance
Of this our diplomatic Peer hence
Is for the purpose of reviewing,
_In person_, what dear Mig is doing,
So as to 'scape all tell-tale letters
'Bout Beresford, and such abetters,--
The only "wretches" for whose aid[3]
Letters seem _not_ to have been made.


[1] In the Government of Perm.

[2] Territory belonging to the mines of Kolivano-Kosskressense.

[3] "Heaven first taught letters for some wretch's aid." POPE.






THE DANCE OF BISHOPS;

OR, THE EPISCOPAL QUADRILLE.[1]

A DREAM.

1833.


    "Solemn dances were, on great festivals and celebrations, admitted
    among the primitive Christians, in which even the Bishops and
    dignified Clergy were performers. Scaliger says, that the first
    Bishops were called _praesules_[2] for other reason than that
    they led off these dances."--"_Cyclopaedia_," art. _Dances_.


I've had such a dream--a frightful dream--
Tho' funny mayhap to wags 'twill seem,
By all who regard the Church, like us,
'Twill be thought exceedingly ominous!

As reading in bed I lay last night--
Which (being insured) is my delight--
I happened to doze off just as I got to
The singular fact which forms my motto.
Only think, thought I, as I dozed away,
Of a party of Churchmen dancing the hay!
Clerks, curates and rectors capering all
With a neat-legged Bishop to open the ball!
Scarce had my eyelids time to close,
When the scene I had fancied before me rose--
An Episcopal Hop on a scale so grand
As my dazzled eyes could hardly stand.
For Britain and Erin clubbed their Sees
To make it a Dance of Dignities,
And I saw--oh brightest of Church events!
A quadrille of the two Establishments,
Bishop to Bishop _vis--vis_,
Footing away prodigiously.

There was Bristol capering up to Derry,
And Cork with London making merry;
While huge Llandaff, with a See, so so,
Was to dear old Dublin pointing his toe.
There was Chester, hatched by woman's smile,
Performing a _chaine des Dames_ in style;
While he who, whene'er the Lords' House dozes,
Can waken them up by citing Moses,[3]
The portly Tuam, was all in a hurry
To set, _en avant_, to Canterbury.

Meantime, while pamphlets stuft his pockets,
(All out of date like spent skyrockets,)
Our Exeter stood forth to caper,
As high on the floor as he doth on paper--
like a dapper Dancing Dervise,
Who pirouettes his whole church-service--
Performing, midst those reverend souls,
Such _entrechats_, such _cabrioles_,
Such _balonns_, such--rigmaroles,
Now high, now low, now this, that,
That none could guess what the devil he'd be at;
Tho', watching his various steps, some thought
That a step in the Church was all he sought.

But alas, alas! while thus so gay.
These reverend dancers friskt away,
Nor Paul himself (not the saint, but he
Of the Opera-house) could brisker be,
There gathered a gloom around their glee--
A shadow which came and went so fast,
That ere one could say "'Tis there," 'twas past--
And, lo! when the scene again was cleared,
Ten of the dancers had disappeared!
Ten able-bodied quadrillers swept
From the hallowed floor where late they stept,
While twelve was all that footed it still,
On the Irish side of that grand Quadrille!

Nor this the worst:--still danced they on,
But the pomp was saddened, the smile was gone;
And again from time to time the same
Ill-omened darkness round them came--
While still as the light broke out anew,
Their ranks lookt less by a dozen or two;
Till ah! at last there were only found
Just Bishops enough for a four-hands-round;
And when I awoke, impatient getting,
I left the last holy pair _poussetting_!

N.B.--As ladies in years, it seems,
Have the happiest knack at solving dreams,
I shall leave to my ancient feminine friends
Of the _Standard_ to say what _this_ portends.


[1] Written on the passing of the memorable Bill, in the year 1833, for
the abolition of ten Irish Bishoprics.

[2] Literally, First Dancers.

[3] "And what does Moses say?"--One of the ejaculations with which this
eminent prelate enlivened his famous speech on the Catholic question.






DICK * * * *

A CHARACTER.


Of various scraps and fragments built,
  Borrowed alike from fools and wits,
Dick's mind was like a patchwork quilt,
  Made up of new, old, motley bits--
Where, if the _Co_. called in their shares,
  If petticoats their quota got
And gowns were all refunded theirs,
  The quilt would look but shy, God wot.

And thus he still, new plagiaries seeking,
  Reversed ventriloquism's trick,
For, 'stead of Dick thro' others speaking,
  'Twas others we heard speak thro' Dick.
A Tory now, all bounds exceeding,
  Now best of Whigs, now worst of rats;
One day with Malthus, foe to breeding,
  The next with Sadler, all for brats.

Poor Dick!--and how else could it be?
  With notions all at random caught,
A sort of mental fricassee,
  Made up of legs and wings of thought--
The leavings of the last Debate, or
  A dinner, yesterday, of wits,
Where Dick sate by and, like a waiter,
  Had the scraps for perquisites.






A CORRECTED REPORT OF SOME LATE SPEECHES.

1834.


    "Then I heard one saint speaking, and
    another saint said unto that saint,"


St. Sinclair rose and declared in smooth,
That he wouldn't give sixpence to Maynooth.
He had hated priests the whole of his life,
For a priest was a man who had no wife,[1]
And, having no wife, the Church was his mother,
The Church was his father, sister and brother.
This being the case, he was sorry to say
That a gulf 'twixt Papist and Protestant lay,[2]
So deep and wide, scarce possible was it
To say even "how d' ye do?" across it:
And tho' your Liberals, nimble as fleas,
Could clear such gulfs with perfect ease,
'Twas a jump that naught on earth could make
Your proper, heavy-built Christian take.
No, no,--if a Dance of Sects _must_ be,
He would set to the Baptist willingly,[3]
At the Independent deign to smirk,
And rigadoon with old Mother Kirk;
Nay even, for once, if needs must be,
He'd take hands round with all the three;
But as to a jig with Popery, no,--
To the Harlot ne'er would he point his toe.

St. Mandeville was the next that rose,--
A saint who round as pedler goes
With his pack of piety and prose,
Heavy and hot enough, God knows,--
And he said that Papists were much inclined
To extirpate all of Protestant kind,
Which he couldn't in truth so much condemn,
Having rather a wish to extirpate _them_;
That is,--to guard against mistake,--
To extirpate them for their doctrine's sake;
A distinction Churchman always make,--
Insomuch that when they've prime control,
Tho' sometimes roasting heretics whole,
They but cook the body for sake of the soul.

Next jumpt St. Johnston jollily forth,
The spiritual Dogberry of the North,[4]
A right "wise fellow, and what's more,
An officer," like his type of yore;
And he asked if we grant such toleration,
Pray, what's the use of our Reformation?
What is the use of our Church and State?
Our Bishops, Articles, Tithe and Rate?
And still as he yelled out "what's the use?"
Old Echoes, from their cells recluse
Where they'd for centuries slept, broke loose,
Yelling responsive, "_What's the use_?"


[1] "He objected to the maintenance and education of clergy _bound by
the particular vows of celibacy, which as it were gave them the Church as
their only family, making it fill the places of father and mother and
brother_."--Debate on the Grant to Maynooth College, _The Times_,
April 19.

[2] "It had always appeared to him that _between the Catholic and
Protestant a great gulf_ intervened, with rendered it impossible," etc.

[3] The Baptist might acceptably extend the offices of religion to the
Presbyterian and the Independent, or the member of the Church of England
to any of the other three; but the Catholic," etc.

[4] "Could he then, holding as he did a spiritual office in the Church of
Scotland, (cries of hear, and laughter,) with any consistency give his
consent to a grant of money?" etc.






MORAL POSITIONS.

A DREAM.


    "His Lordship said that it took a long time for a moral position to
    find its way across the Atlantic. He was very sorry that its voyage
    had been so long," etc.--Speech of Lord Dudley and Ward on Colonial
    Slavery, March 8.


T'other night, after hearing Lord Dudley's oration
  (A treat that comes once a year as May-day does),
I dreamt that I saw--what a strange operation!
A "moral position" shipt off for Barbadoes.

The whole Bench of Bishops stood by in grave attitudes,
  Packing the article tidy and neat;--
As their Reverences know that in southerly latitudes
  "Moral positions" don't keep very sweet.

There was Bathurst arranging the custom-house pass;
  And to guard the frail package from tousing and routing,
There stood my Lord Eldon, endorsing it "Glass,"
  Tho' as to which side should lie uppermost, doubting.
The freight was however stowed safe in the hold;
  The winds were polite and the moon lookt romantic,
While off in the good ship "The Truth" we were rolled,
  With our ethical cargo, across the Atlantic.
Long, dolefully long, seemed the voyage we made;
  For "The Truth," at all times but a very slow sailer,
By friends, near as much as by foes, is delayed,
  And few come aboard her tho' so many hail her.

At length, safe arrived, I went thro' "tare and tret,"
  Delivered my goods in the primest condition.
And next morning read in the _Bridge-town Gazette_,
  "Just arrived by 'The Truth,' a new moral position.

"The Captain"--here, startled to find myself named
  As "the Captain"--(a thing which, I own it with pain,
I thro' life have avoided,) I woke--lookt ashamed,
  Found I _wasn't_ a captain and dozed off again.






THE MAD TORY AND THE COMET.

FOUNDED ON A LATE DISTRESSING INCIDENT.

1832-3.


    _'mutantem regna cometem."_
    LUCAN.[1]


"Tho' all the pet mischiefs we count upon fail,
  "Tho' Cholera, hurricanes, Wellington leave us,
"We've still in reserve, mighty Comet, thy tail;--
  "Last hope" of the Tories, wilt thou too deceive us?

"No--'tis coming, 'tis coming, the avenger is nigh;
  "Heed, heed not, ye placemen, how Herapath flatters;
"One whisk from that tail as it passes us by
  "Will settle at once all political matters;--

"The East-India Question, the Bank, the Five Powers,
  "(Now turned into two) with their rigmarole Protocols;--
"Ha! ha! ye gods, how this new friend of ours
  "Will knock, right and left, all diplomacy's what-d'ye-calls!

"Yes, rather than Whigs at our downfall should mock,
  "Meet planets and suns in one general hustle!
"While happy in vengeance we welcome the shock
  "That shall jerk from their places, Grey, Althorp and Russell."

Thus spoke a mad Lord, as, with telescope raised,
  His wild Tory eye on the heavens he set:
And tho' nothing destructive appeared as he gazed,
  Much hoped that there _would_ before Parliament met.

And still, as odd shapes seemed to flit thro' his glass,
  "Ha! there it is now," the poor maniac cries;
While his fancy with forms but too monstrous, alas!
  From his own Tory zodiac peoples the skies:--

"Now I spy a big body, good heavens, how big!
  "Whether Bucky[2] or Taurus I cannot well say:--
"And yonder there's Eldon's old Chancery wig,
  "In its dusty aphelion fast fading away.

"I see, 'mong those fatuous meteors behind,
  "Londonderry, _in vacuo_, flaring about;--
"While that dim double star, of the nebulous kind,
  "Is the Gemini, Roden and Lorton, no doubt.

"Ah, Ellenborough! 'faith, I first thought 'twas the Comet;
  "So like that in Milton, it made me quite pale;
"The head with the same 'horrid hair' coming from it,
  "And plenty of vapor, but--where is the tail?"

Just then, up aloft jumpt the gazer elated--
  For lo! his bright glass a phenomenon showed,
Which he took to be Cumberland, _upwards_ translated,
  Instead of his natural course, _t'other_ road!

But too awful that sight for a spirit so shaken,--
  Down dropt the poor Tory in fits and  grimaces,
Then off to the Bedlam in Charles Street was taken,
  And is now one of Halford's most favorite cases.


[1] Eclipses and comets have been always looked to as great changers of
administrations.

[2] The Duke of Buckingham.

       *       *       *       *       *






FROM THE HON. HENRY ----, TO LADY EMMA ----.

_Paris, March 30,1833_.


You bid me explain, my dear angry Ma'amselle,
How I came thus to bolt without saying farewell;
And the truth is,--as truth you _will_ have, my sweet railer,--
  There are two worthy persons I always feel loath
To take leave of at starting,--my mistress and tailor,--
  As somehow one always has _scenes_ with them both;
The Snip in ill-humor, the Syren in tears,
  She calling on Heaven, and he on the attorney,--
Till sometimes, in short, 'twixt his duns and his dears,
  A young gentleman risks being stopt in his journey.

But to come to the point, tho' you think, I dare say.
That 'tis debt or the Cholera drives me away,
'Pon honor you're wrong;--such a mere bagatelle
  As a pestilence, nobody now-a-days fears;
And the fact is, my love, I'm thus bolting, pell-mell,
  To get out of the way of these horrid new Peers;[1]
This deluge of coronets frightful to think of;
Which England is now for her sins on the brink of;
This coinage of _nobles_,--coined all of 'em, badly,
And sure to bring Counts to a _dis_-count most sadly.

Only think! to have Lords over running the nation,
As plenty as frogs in a Dutch inundation;
No shelter from Barons, from Earls no protection,
And tadpole young Lords too in every direction,--
Things created in haste just to make a Court list of,
Two legs and a coronet all they consist of!
The prospect's quite frightful, and what Sir George Rose
  (My particular friend) says is perfectly true,
That, so dire the alternative, nobody knows,
  'Twixt the Peers and the Pestilence, what he's to do;
And Sir George even doubts,--could he choose his disorder,--
'Twixt coffin and coronet, _which_ he would order.
This being the case, why, I thought, my dear Emma,
'Twere best to fight shy of so curst a dilemma;
And tho' I confess myself somewhat a villain,
  To've left _idol mio_ without an _addio_,
Console your sweet heart, and a week hence from Milan
  I'll send you--some news of Bellini's last trio.

N.B.  Have just packt up my travelling set-out,
Things a tourist in Italy _can't_ go without--
Viz., a pair of _gants gras_, from old Houbigant's shop,
Good for hands that the air of Mont Cenis might chap.
Small presents for ladies,--and nothing so wheedles
The creatures abroad as your golden-eyed needles.
A neat pocket Horace by which folks are cozened
To think one knows Latin, when--one, perhaps, doesn't;
With some little book about heathen mythology,
Just large enough to refresh one's theology;
Nothing on earth being half such a bore as
Not knowing the difference 'twixt Virgins and Floras.
Once more, love, farewell, best regards to the girls,
And mind you beware of damp feet and new Earls.

HENRY.


[1] A new creation of Peers was generally expected at this time.






TRIUMPH OF BIGOTRY.


    College.--We announced, in our last that Lefroy and Shaw were
    returned. They were chaired yesterday; the Students of the College
    determined, it would seem, to imitate the mob in all things,
    harnessing themselves to the car, and the Masters of Arts bearing
    Orange flags and bludgeons before, beside, and behind the car."
    _Dublin Evening Post_, Dec. 20, 1832.


Ay, yoke ye to the bigots' car,
  Ye chosen of Alma Mater's scions;-
Fleet chargers drew the God of War,
  Great Cybele was drawn by lions,
And Sylvan Pan, as Poet's dream,
Drove four young panthers in his team.
Thus classical Lefroy, for once, is,
  Thus, studious of a like turn-out,
He harnesses young sucking dunces,
  To draw him as their Chief about,
And let the world a picture see
Of Dulness yoked to Bigotry:
Showing us how young College hacks
Can pace with bigots at their backs,
As tho' the cubs were _born_ to draw
Such luggage as Lefroy and Shaw,
Oh! shade of Goldsmith, shade of Swift,
  Bright spirits whom, in days of yore,
This Queen of Dulness sent adrift,
  As aliens to her foggy shore;---
Shade of our glorious Grattan, too,
  Whose very name her shame recalls;
Whose effigy her bigot crew
  Reversed upon their monkish walls,[1]--
Bear witness (lest the world should doubt)
  To your mute Mother's dull renown,
Then famous but for Wit turned _out_,
  And Eloquence _turned upside down_;
But now ordained new wreaths to win,
  Beyond all fame of former days,
By breaking thus young donkies in
  To draw M.P.s amid the brays
  Alike of donkies and M.A.s;--
  Defying Oxford to surpass 'em
  In this new "_Gradus ad Parnassum_."


[1] In the year 1799, the Board of Trinity College, Dublin, thought
proper, as a mode of expressing their disapprobation of Mr. Grattan's
public conduct, to order his portrait, in the Great Hall of the
University, to be turned upside down, and in this position it remained for
some time.






TRANSLATION FROM THE GULL LANGUAGE.


    _Scripta manet_.


1833.


'Twas graved on the Stone of Destiny,[1]
In letters four and letters three;
And ne'er did the King of the Gulls go by
But those awful letters scared his eye;
For he knew that a Prophet Voice had said,
"As long as those words by man were read,
"The ancient race of the Gulls should ne'er
"One hour of peace or plenty share."
But years on years successive flew,
And the letters still more legible grew,--
At top, a T, an H, an E,
And underneath, D. E. B. T.

Some thought them Hebrew,--such as Jews
More skilled in Scrip than Scripture use;
While some surmised 'twas an ancient way
Of keeping accounts, (well known in the day
Of the famed Didlerius Jeremias,
Who had thereto a wonderful bias,)
And proved in books most learnedly boring,
'Twas called the Pon_tick_ way of scoring.

Howe'er this be there never were yet
Seven letters of the alphabet,
That 'twixt them formed so grim a spell,
Or scared a Land of Gulls so well,
As did this awful riddle-me-ree
Of T. H. E. D. E. B. T.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hark!--it is struggling Freedom's cry;
"Help, help, ye nations, or I die;
"'Tis Freedom's fight and on the field
"Where I expire _your_ doom is sealed."
The Gull-King hears the awakening call,
He hath summoned his Peers and Patriots all,
And he asks. "Ye noble Gulls, shall we
"Stand basely by at the fall of the Free,
"Nor utter a curse nor deal a blow?"
And they answer with voice of thunder, "No."

Out fly their flashing swords in the air!--
But,--why do they rest suspended there?
What sudden blight, what baleful charm,
Hath chilled each eye and checkt each arm?
Alas! some withering hand hath thrown
The veil from off that fatal stone,
And pointing now with sapless finger,
Showeth where dark those letters linger,--
Letters four and letters three,
T. H. E. D. E. B. T.

At sight thereof, each lifted brand
Powerless falls from every hand;
In vain the Patriot knits his brow,--
Even talk, his staple, fails him now.
In vain the King like a hero treads,
His Lords of the Treasury shake their heads;
And to all his talk of "brave and free,"
No answer getteth His Majesty
But "T. H. E. D. E. B. T."

In short, the whole Gull nation feels
They're fairly spell-bound, neck and heels;
And so, in the face of the laughing world,
Must e'en sit down with banners furled,
Adjourning all their dreams sublime
Of glory and war to-some other time.


[1] Liafail, or the Stone of Destiny,--for which see Westminster Abbey.






NOTIONS ON REFORM.

BY A MODERN REFORMER.


Of all the misfortunes as yet brought to pass
  By this comet-like Bill, with its long tail of speeches,
The saddest and worst is the schism which, alas!
  It has caused between Wetherel's waistcoat and breeches.

Some symptoms of this Anti-Union propensity
  Had oft broken out in that quarter before;
But the breach, since the Bill, has attained such immensity,
  Daniel himself could have scarce wisht it more.

Oh! haste to repair it, ye friends of good order,
  Ye Atwoods and Wynns, ere the moment is past;
Who can doubt that we tread upon Anarchy's border,
  When the ties that should hold men are loosening so fast?

_Make_ Wetherel yield to "some sort of Reform"
  (As we all must, God help us! with very wry faces;)
And loud as he likes let him bluster and storm
  About Corporate Rights, so he'll only wear braces.

Should those he now sports have been long in possession,
  And, like his own borough, the worse for the wear,
Advise him at least as a prudent concession
  To Intellect's progress, to buy a new pair.

Oh! who that e'er saw him when vocal he stands,
  With a look something midway 'twixt Filch's and Lockit's,
While still, to inspire him, his deeply-thrust hands
  Keep jingling the rhino in both breeches-pockets--

Who that ever has listened thro' groan and thro' cough,
  To the speeches inspired by this music of pence,--
But must grieve that there's any thing like _falling off_
  In that great nether source of his wit and his sense?

Who that knows how he lookt when, with grace debonair,
  He began first to court--rather late in the season--
Or when, less fastidious, he sat in the chair
  Of his old friend, the Nottingham Goddess of Reason;[1]

That Goddess whose borough-like virtue attracted
  All mongers in _both_ wares to proffer their love;
Whose chair like the stool of the Pythoness acted,
  As Wetherel's rants ever since go to prove;

_Who_ in short would not grieve if a man of his graces
  Should go on rejecting, unwarned by the past,
The "moderate Reform" of a pair of new braces,
  Till, some day,--he'll all fall to pieces at last.


[1] It will be recollected that the learned gentleman himself boasted, one
night, in the House of Commons, of having sat in the very chair which this
allegorical lady had occupied.






TORY PLEDGES.


I pledge myself thro' thick and thin,
  To labor still with zeal devout
To get the Outs, poor devils, in,
  And turn the Ins, the wretches, out.

I pledge myself, tho' much bereft
  Of ways and means of ruling ill,
To make the most of what are left,
  And stick to all that's rotten still.

Tho' gone the days of place and pelf,
  And drones no more take all the honey,
I pledge myself to cram myself
  With all I can of public money.

To quarter on that social purse
  My nephews, nieces, sisters, brothers,
Nor, so _we_ prosper, care a curse
  How much 'tis at the expense of others.

I pledge myself, whenever Right
  And Might on any point divide,
Not to ask which is black or white.
  But take at once the strongest side.

For instance, in all Tithe discussions,
 I'm _for_ the Reverend encroachers:-
I loathe the Poles, applaud the Russians,--
  Am _for_ the Squires, _against_ the Poachers.

Betwixt the Corn-lords and the Poor
  I've not the slightest hesitation,--
The People _must_ be starved, to insure
  The Land its due remuneration.

I pledge myself to be no more
  With Ireland's wrongs beprosed or shammed,--
I vote her grievances a _bore_,
  So she may suffer and be damned.

Or if she kick, let it console us,
  We still have plenty of red coats,
To cram the Church, that general bolus,
  Down any given amount of throats.

I dearly love the Frankfort Diet,--
  Think newspapers the worst of crimes;
And would, to give some chance of quiet,
  Hang all the writers of _"The Times;_"

Break all their correspondents' bones,
  All authors of "Reply," "Rejoinder,"
From the Anti-Tory, Colonel Jones,
  To the Anti-Suttee, Mr. Poynder.

Such are the Pledges I propose;
  And tho' I can't now offer gold,
There's many a way of buying those
  Who've but the taste for being sold.

So here's, with three times three hurrahs,
  A toast of which you'll not complain,--
"Long life to jobbing; may the days
  "Of Peculation shine again!"






ST. JEROME ON EARTH.

FIRST VISIT.

1832.


As St. Jerome who died some ages ago,
Was sitting one day in the shades below,
"I've heard much of English bishops," quoth he,
"And shall now take a trip to earth to see
"How far they agree in their lives and ways
"With our good old bishops of ancient days."

He had learned--but learned without misgivings--
Their love for good living and eke good livings;
Not knowing (as ne'er having taken degrees)
That good _living_ means claret and fricassees,
While its plural means simply--pluralities.

"From all I hear," said the innocent man,
"They are quite on the good old primitive plan.
"For wealth and pomp they little can care,
"As they all say _'No'_ to the Episcopal chair;
"And their vestal virtue it well denotes
"That they all, good men, wear petticoats."

Thus saying, post-haste to earth he hurries,
And knocks at the Archbishop of Canterbury's.
The door was oped by a lackey in lace,
Saying, "What's your business with his Grace?"
"His Grace!" quoth Jerome--for posed was he,
Not knowing what _sort_ this Grace could be;
Whether Grace _preventing_, Grace _particular_,
Grace of that breed called _Quinquarticular_--[1]

In short he rummaged his holy mind
The exact description of Grace to find,
Which thus could represented be
By a footman in full livery.
At last, out loud in a laugh he broke,
(For dearly the good saint loved his joke)[2]
And said--surveying, as sly he spoke,
The costly palace from roof to base--
"Well, it isn't, at least, a _saving_ Grace!"
"Umph!" said the lackey, a man of few words,
"The Archbishop is gone to the House of Lords."

"To the House of the Lord, you mean, my son,
"For in _my_ time at least there was but one;
Unless such many-_fold_ priests as these
"Seek, even in their LORD, pluralities!"[3]
"No time for gab," quoth the man in lace:
Then slamming the door in St. Jerome's face
With a curse to the single knockers all
Went to finish his port in the servants' hall,
And propose a toast (humanely meant
To include even Curates in its extent)
"To all as _serves_ the Establishment."


[1] So called from the proceedings of the Synod of Dort.

[2] Witness his well known pun on the name of his adversary Vigilantius,
whom he calls facetiously Dormitantius.

[3] The suspicion attached to some of the early Fathers of being Arians in
their doctrine would appear to derive some confirmation, from this
passage.






ST. JEROME ON EARTH.

SECOND VISIT.


    "This much I dare say, that, since _lording_ and loitering hath
    come up, preaching hath come down, contrary to the Apostles' times.
    For they preached and _lorded_ not; and now they _lord_ and
    preach not.... Ever since the Prelates were made Lords and Nobles, the
    plough standeth; there is no work done, people starve."
    --_Latimer, "Sermon of the Plough."_


"Once more," said Jerome, "I'll run up and see
How the Church goes on,"--and off set he.
Just then the packet-boat which trades
Betwixt our planet and the shades
Had arrived below with a freight so queer,
"My eyes!" said Jerome, "what have we here?"--
For he saw, when nearer he explored,
They'd a cargo of Bishops' wigs aboard.

"They are ghosts of wigs," said Charon, "all,
"Once worn by nobs Episcopal.[1]
"For folks on earth, who've got a store
"Of cast off things they'll want no more,
"Oft send them down, as gifts, you know,
"To a certain Gentleman here below.
"A sign of the times, I plainly see,"
Said the Saint to himself as, pondering, he
Sailed off in the death-boat gallantly.

Arrived on earth, quoth he, "No more
"I'll affect a body as before;
"For I think I'd best, in the company
"Of Spiritual Lords, a spirit be,
"And glide unseen from See to See."
But oh! to tell what scenes he saw,--
It was more than Rabelais's pen could draw.
For instance, he found Exeter,
Soul, body, inkstand, all in a stir,--
For love of God? for sake of King?
For good of people?--no such thing;
But to get for himself, by some new trick,
A shove to a better bishoprick.

He found that pious soul, Van Mildert,
Much with his money-bags bewildered;
Snubbing the Clerks of the Diocese,
Because the rogues showed restlessness
At having too little cash to touch,
While he so Christianly bears too much.
He found old Sarum's wits as gone
As his own beloved text in John,--[2]
Text he hath prosed so long upon,
That 'tis thought when askt, at the gate of heaven,
His name, he'll answer, "John, v. 7."

"But enough of Bishops I've had to-day,"
Said the weary Saint,--"I must away.
"Tho' I own I should like before I go
"To see for once (as I'm askt below
"If really such odd sights exist)
"A regular six-fold Pluralist."
Just then he heard a general cry--
"There's Doctor Hodgson galloping by!"
"Ay, that's the man," says the Saint, "to follow,"
And off he sets with a loud view-hello,
At Hodgson's heels, to catch if he can
A glimpse of this singular plural man.
But,--talk of Sir Boyle Roche's bird![3]
To compare him with Hodgson is absurd.
"Which way, sir, pray, is the doctor gone?"--
"He is now at his living at Hillingdon."--
"No, no,--you're out, by many a mile,
"He's away at his Deanery in Carlisle."--
"Pardon me, sir; but I understand
"He's gone to his living in Cumberland."--
"God bless me, no,--he cant be there;
"You must try St. George's, Hanover Square."

Thus all in vain the Saint inquired,
From living to living, mockt and tired;--
'Twas Hodgson here, 'twas Hodgson there,
'Twas Hodgson nowhere, everywhere;
Till fairly beat the Saint gave o'er
And flitted away to the Stygian shore,
To astonish the natives underground
With the comical things he on earth had found.


[1] The wig, which had so long formed an essential part of the dress of an
English bishop, was at this time beginning to be dispensed with.

[2] 1 John v. 7. A text which, though long given up by all the rest of the
orthodox world, is still pertinaciously adhered to by this Right Reverend
scholar.

[3] It was a saying of the well-known Sir Boyle, that "a man could not be
in two places at once, unless he was a bird."






THOUGHTS ON TAR BARRELS.

(VIDE DESCRIPTION OF A LATE FTE.)[1]

1832.


What a pleasing contrivance! how aptly devised
  'Twixt tar and magnolias to puzzle one's noses!
And how the tar-barrels must all be surprised
  To find themselves seated like "Love among roses!"

What a pity we can't, by precautions like these,
  Clear the air of that other still viler infection;
That radical pest, that old whiggish disease,
  Of which cases, true-blue, are in every direction.

Stead of barrels, let's light up an _Auto da Fe_
  Of a few good combustible Lords of "the Club;"
They would fume in a trice, the Whig cholera away,
  And there's Bucky would burn like a barrel of bub.

How Roden would blaze! and what rubbish throw out!
  A volcano of nonsense in active display;
While Vane, as a butt, amidst laughter, would spout
  The hot nothings he's full of, all night and all day.

And then, for a finish, there's Cumberland's Duke,--
  Good Lord, how his chin-tuft would crackle in air!
Unless (as is shrewdly surmised from his look)
  He's already bespoke for combustion elsewhere.


[1] The Marquis of Hertford's Fte.--From dread of cholera his Lordship
had ordered tar-barrels to be burned in every direction.






THE CONSULTATION.[1]


    "When they _do_ agree, their unanimity is
    wonderful. _The Critic_.


1833.


_Scene discovers Dr. Whig and Dr. Tory in consultation. Patient on the
floor between them_.

  _Dr. Whig_.--This wild Irish patient _does_ pester me so.
That what to do with him, I'm curst if I know.
I've _promist_ him anodynes--
  _Dr. Tory_. Anodynes!--Stuff.
Tie him down--gag him well--he'll be tranquil enough.
That's _my_ mode of practice.
  _Dr Whig_. True, quite in _your_ line,
But unluckily not much, till lately, in _mine_.
'Tis so painful--
  _Dr. Tory_.--Pooh, nonsense--ask Ude how he feels,
When, for Epicure feasts, he prepares his live eels,
By flinging them in, 'twixt the bars of the fire,
And letting them wriggle on there till they tire.
_He_, too, says "'tis painful"--"quite makes his heart bleed"--
But "Your eels are a vile, oleaginous breed."--
He would fain use them gently, but Cookery says "No,"
And--in short--eels were _born_ to be treated just so.[2]
'Tis the same with these Irish,--who're odder fish still,--
Your tender Whig heart shrinks from using them ill;
I myself in my youth, ere I came to get wise,
Used at some operations to blush to the eyes:--
But, in fact, my dear brother,--if I may make bold
To style you, as Peachum did Lockit, of old,--
We, Doctors, _must_ act with the firmness of Ude,
And, indifferent like him,--so the fish is _but_ stewed,--
_Must_ torture live Pats for the general good.
       [_Here patient groans and kicks a little_.]
  _Dr. Whig_.--But what, if one's patient's so devilish perverse,
That he _won't_ be thus tortured?
  _Dr. Tory_. Coerce, sir, coerce.
You're a juvenile performer, but once you begin,
You cant think how fast you may train your hand in:
And (_smiling_) who knows but old Tory may take to the shelf,
With the comforting thought that, in place and in pelf,
He's succeeded by one just as--bad as himself?
  _Dr. Whig_ (_looking flattered_).--
Why, to tell you the truth, I've a small matter here,
Which you helped me to make for my patient last year,--
       [_Goes to a cupboard and brings out a strait-waistcoat
        and gag_.]
And such rest I've enjoyed from his raving since then
That I've made up my mind he shall wear it again.
  _Dr. Tory_ (_embracing him_).
Oh, charming!-My dear Doctor Whig, you're a treasure,
Next to torturing, _myself_, to help _you_ is a pleasure.
       [_Assisting Dr. Whig_.]
Give me leave--I've some practice in these mad machines;
There--tighter--the gag in the mouth, by all means.
Delightful!--all's snug--not a squeak need you fear,--
You may now put your anodynes off till next year.
       [_Scene closes_.]


[1] These verses, as well as some others that follow, were extorted from
me by that lamentable measure of the Whig ministry, the Irish Coercion
Act.

[2] This eminent artist, in the second edition of the work wherein he
propounds this mode of purifying his eels, professes himself much
concerned at the charge of inhumanity brought against his practice, but
still begs leave respectfully to repeat that it _is_ the only proper
mode of preparing eels for the table.






TO THE REV. CHARLES OVERTON,

CURATE OF ROMALDKIRK.

AUTHOR OF THE POETICAL PORTRAITURE OF THE CHURCH.

1833.


Sweet singer of Romaldkirk, thou who art reckoned,
By critics Episcopal, David the Second,[1]
If thus, as a Curate, so lofty your flight,
Only think, in a Rectory, how you _would_ write!
Once fairly inspired by the "Tithe-crowned Apollo,"
(Who beats, I confess it, our lay Phoebus hollow,
Having gotten, besides the old _Nine's_ inspiration,
The _Tenth_ of all eatable things in creation.)
There's nothing in fact that a poet like you,
So be-_nined_ and be-_tenthed_, couldn't easily do.

Round the lips of the sweet-tongued Athenian[2] they say,
While yet but a babe in his cradle he lay,
Wild honey-bees swarmed as presage to tell
Of the sweet-flowing words that thence afterwards fell.
Just so round our Overton's cradle, no doubt,
Tenth ducklings and chicks were seen flitting about;
Goose embryos, waiting their doomed decimation,
Came, shadowing forth his adult destination,
And small, sucking tithe-pigs, in musical droves,
Announced the Church poet whom Chester approves.
O Horace! when thou, in thy vision of yore,
Didst dream that a snowy-white plumage came o'er
Thy etherealized limbs, stealing downily on,
Till, by Fancy's strong spell, thou wert turned to a swan,
Little thought'st thou such fate could a poet befall,
Without any effort of fancy, at all;
Little thought'st thou the world would in Overton find
A bird, ready-made, somewhat different in kind,
But as perfect as Michaelmas' self could produce,
By gods yclept _anser_, by mortals a _goose_.


[1] "Your Lordship," says Mr. Overton, in the Dedication of his Poem to
the Bishop of Chester," has kindly expressed your persuasion that my Muse
will always be a 'Muse of sacred song and that it will be tuned as David's
was.'"

[2] Sophocles.






SCENE FROM A PLAY, ACTED AT OXFORD, CALLED "MATRICULATION."[1]


[Boy discovered at a table, with the Thirty-Nine Articles before him.--
Enter the Rt. Rev. Doctor Phillpots.]

_Doctor P_.--There, my lad, lie the
Articles--(_Boy begins to count them_) just thirty nine--
No occasion to count--you've now only to sign.
At Cambridge where folks are less High-church than we,
The whole Nine-and-Thirty are lumped into Three.
Let's run o'er the items;--there 'a Justification,
Predestination, and Supererogation--
Not forgetting Salvation and Creed Athanasian,
Till we reach, at last, Queen Bess's Ratification.
That is sufficient--now, sign--having read quite enough,
You "believe in the full and true meaning thereof?"

(_Boy stares_.)

Oh! a mere form of words, to make things smooth and brief,--
A commodious and short make-believe of belief,
Which our Church has drawn up in a form thus articular
To keep out in general all who're particular.
But what's the boy doing? what! reading all thro',
And my luncheon fast cooling!--this never will do.
_Boy_ (_poring over the Articles_).--
Here are points which--pray, Doctor, what's "Grace of Congruity?"
_Doctor P._ (_sharply_).--You'll find out, young sir, when
you've more ingenuity.
At present, by signing, you pledge yourself merely.
Whate'er it may be, to believe it sincerely,
Both in _dining_ and _signing_ we take the same plan,--
First, swallow all down, then digest--as we can.
_Boy_ (_still reading_).--I've to gulp, I see, St. Athanasius's
  Creed,
Which. I'm told, is a very tough morsel indeed;
As he damns--

  _Doctor P. (aside)_.--Ay, and so would _I_, willingly, too,
All confounded particular young boobies, like you.
This comes of Reforming!--all's o'er with our land,
When people wont stand what they can't _under_-stand;
Nor perceive that our ever-revered Thirty-Nine
Were made not for men to _believe_ but to _sign_.
              _Exit Dr. P. in a passion_.

[1] It appears that when a youth of fifteen went to be matriculated at
Oxford, he was required first to subscribe the Thirty-Nine Articles of
Religious Belief.






LATE TITHE CASE.


    _"sic vos non vobis."_


1833.


    "The Vicar of Birmingham desires me to state that, in consequence of
    the passing of a recent Act of Parliament, he is compelled to adopt
    measures which may by some be considered harsh or precipitate; but,
    _in duty to what he owes to his successors_, he feels bound to
    preserve the rights of the vicarage."
    --_Letter from Mr. S. Powell_, August 6.


No, _not_ for yourselves, ye reverend men,
Do you take one pig in every ten,
But for Holy Church's future heirs,
Who've an abstract right to that pig, as theirs;
The law supposing that such heirs male
Are already seized of the pig, in tail.
No, _not_ for himself hath Birmingham's priest
His "well-beloved" of their pennies fleeced:
But it is that, before his prescient eyes,
All future Vicars of Birmingham rise,
With their embryo daughters, nephews, nieces,
And 'tis for _them_ the poor he fleeces.
He heareth their voices, ages hence
Saying, "Take the pig"--"oh take the pence;"
The cries of little Vicarial dears,
The unborn Birminghamites, reach his ears;
And, did he resist that soft appeal,
He would _not_ like a true-born Vicar feel.
Thou, too, Lundy of Lackington!
A rector true, if e'er there was one,
Who, for sake of the Lundies of coming ages,
Gripest the tenths of laborer's wages.[1]
'Tis true, in the pockets of _thy_ small-clothes
The claimed "obvention"[2]of four-pence goes;
But its abstract spirit, unconfined,
Spreads to all future Rector-kind,
Warning them all to their rights to wake,
And rather to face the block, the stake,
Than give up their darling right _to take_.

One grain of musk, it is said, perfumes
(So subtle its spirit) a thousand rooms,
And a single four-pence, pocketed well,
Thro' a thousand rectors' lives will tell.
Then still continue, ye reverend souls,
And still as your rich Pactolus rolls,
Grasp every penny on every side,
From every wretch, to swell its tide:
Remembering still what the Law lays down,
In that pure poetic style of its own.
"If the parson _in esse_ submits to loss, he
"Inflicts the same on the parson _in posse_."


[1] Fourteen agricultural laborers (one of whom received so little as six
guineas for yearly wages, one eight, one nine, another ten guineas, and
the best paid of the whole not more than 18_l_. annually) were all, in the
course of the autumn of 1832, served with demands of tithe at the rate of
4_d_. in the 1_l_. sterling, on behalf of the Rev. F. Lundy, Rector of
Lackington, etc.--_The Times_, August, 1833.

[2] One of the various general terms under which oblations, tithes, etc.,
are comprised.






FOOLS' PARADISE.

DREAM THE FIRST.


I have been, like Puck, I have been, in a trice,
To a realm they call Fool's Paradise,
Lying N.N.E. of the Land of Sense,
And seldom blest with a glimmer thence.
But they wanted not in this happy place,
Where a light of its own gilds every face;
Or if some wear a shadowy brow,
'Tis the _wish_ to look wise,--not knowing _how_.
Self-glory glistens o'er all that's there,
The trees, the flowers have a jaunty air;
The well-bred wind in a whisper blows,
The snow, if it snows, is _couleur de rose_,
The falling founts in a titter fall,
And the sun looks simpering down on all.

Oh, 'tisn't in tongue or pen to trace
The scenes I saw in that joyous place.
There were Lords and Ladies sitting together,
In converse sweet, "What charming weather!--
"You'll all rejoice to hear, I'm sure,
"Lord Charles has got a good sinecure;
"And the Premier says, my youngest brother
"(Him in the Guards) shall have another.

"Isnt this very, _very_ gallant!--
"As for my poor old virgin aunt,
"Who has lost her all, poor thing, at whist,
"We must quarter _her_ on the Pension List."
Thus smoothly time in that Eden rolled;
It seemed like an Age of _real_ gold,
Where all who liked might have a slice,
So rich was that Fools' Paradise.

But the sport at which most time they spent,
Was a puppet-show, called Parliament
Performed by wooden Ciceros,
As large as life, who rose to prose,
While, hid behind them, lords and squires,
Who owned the puppets, pulled the wires;
And thought it the very best device
Of that most prosperous Paradise,
To make the vulgar pay thro' the nose
For them and their wooden Ciceros.

And many more such things I saw
In this Eden of Church and State and Law;
Nor e'er were known such pleasant folk
As those who had the _best_ of the joke.
There were Irish Rectors, such as resort
To Cheltenham yearly, to drink--port,
And bumper, "Long may the Church endure,
"May her cure of souls be a sinecure,
"And a score of Parsons to every soul
"A moderate allowance on the whole."
There were Heads of Colleges lying about,
From which the sense had all run out,
Even to the lowest classic lees,
Till nothing was left but _quantities_;
Which made them heads most fit to be
Stuck up on a University,
Which yearly hatches, in its schools,
Such flights of young Elysian fools.
Thus all went on, so snug and nice,
In this happiest possible Paradise.

But plain it was to see, alas!
That a downfall soon must come to pass.
For grief is a lot the good and wise
Dont quite so much monopolize,
But that ("lapt in Elysium" as they are)
Even blessed fools must have their share.
And so it happened:--but what befell,
In Dream the Second I mean to tell.






THE RECTOR AND HIS CURATE;

OR, ONE POUND TWO.


    "I trust we shall part as we met, in peace and charity. My last
    payment to you paid your salary up to the 1st of this month. Since
    that, I owe you for one month, which, being a long month, of
    thirty-one days, amounts, as near as I can calculate, to six pounds
    eight shillings. My steward returns you as a debtor to the amount of
    SEVEN POUNDS TEN SHILLINGS FOR COX-ACRE-GROUND, which leaves some
    trifling balance in my favor."--_Letter of Dismissal from the Rev.
    Marcus Beresford to his Curate, the Rev. T. A. Lyons_.


The account is balanced--the bill drawn out,--
The debit and credit all right, no doubt--
The Rector rolling in wealth and state,
Owes to his Curate six pound eight;
The Curate, that _least_ well-fed of men,
Owes to his Rector seven pound ten,
Which maketh the balance clearly due
From Curate to Rector, one pound two.

Ah balance, on earth unfair, uneven!
But sure to be all set right in heaven,
Where bills like these will be checkt, some day,
And the balance settled the other way:
Where Lyons the curate's hard-wrung sum
Will back to his shade with interest come;
And Marcus, the rector, deep may rue
This tot, in his favor, of one pound two.






PADDY'S METAMORPHOSIS.

1833.


About fifty years since, in the days of our daddies,
  That plan was commenced which the wise now applaud,
Of shipping off Ireland's most turbulent Paddies,
  As good raw material for _settlers_, abroad.
Some West-India island, whose name I forget,
  Was the region then chosen for this scheme so romantic;
And such the success the first colony met,
  That a second, soon after, set sail o'er the Atlantic.

Behold them now safe at the long-lookt-for shore,
  Sailing in between banks that the Shannon might greet,
And thinking of friends whom, but two years before,
  They had sorrowed to lose, but would soon again meet.

And, hark! from the shore a glad welcome there came--
  "Arrah, Paddy from Cork, is it you, my sweet boy?"
While Pat stood astounded, to hear his own name
  Thus hailed by black devils, who capered for joy!

Can it possibly be?--half amazement--half doubt,
  Pat listens again--rubs his eyes and looks steady;
Then heaves a deep sigh, and in horror yells out,
  "Good Lord! only think,--black and curly already!"

Deceived by that well-mimickt brogue in his ears,
  Pat read his own doom in these wool-headed figures,
And thought, what a climate, in less than two years,
  To turn a whole cargo of Pats into niggers!

MORAL.

'Tis thus,--but alas! by a marvel more true
  Than is told in this rival of Ovid's best stories,--
Your Whigs, when in office a short year or two,
  By a _lusus naturae_, all turn into Tories.

And thus, when I hear them "strong measures" advise,
  Ere the seats that they sit on have time to get steady,
I say, while I listen, with tears in my eyes,
  "Good Lord! only think,--black and curly already!"






COCKER, ON CHURCH REFORM.

FOUNDED UPON SOME LATE CALCULATIONS.

1833.


Fine figures of speech let your orators follow,
Old Cocker has figures that beat them all hollow.
Tho' famed for his rules _Aristotle_ may be,
In but _half_ of this Sage any merit I see,
For, as honest Joe Hume says, the "_tottle_" for me!

For instance, while others discuss and debate,
It is thus about Bishops _I_ ratiocinate.

In England, where, spite of the infidel's laughter,
'Tis certain our souls are lookt _very_ well after,
Two Bishops can well (if judiciously sundered)
Of parishes manage two thousand two hundred.--
Said number of parishes, under said teachers,
Containing three millions of Protestant creatures,--
So that each of said Bishops full ably controls
One million and five hundred thousands of souls.

And now comes old Cocker. In Ireland we're told,
_Half_ a million includes the whole Protestant fold;
If, therefore, for three million souls, 'tis conceded
_Two_ proper-sized Bishops are all that is needed,
'Tis plain, for the Irish _half_ million who want 'em,
_One-third_ of _one_ Bishop is just the right quantum.
And thus, by old Cocker's sublime Rule of Three,
The Irish Church question's resolved to a T;
Keeping always that excellent maxim in view,
That, in saving men's souls, we must save money too.

Nay, if--as St. Roden complains is the case--
The half million of _soul_ is decreasing apace,
The demand, too, for _bishop_ will also fall off,
Till the _tithe_ of one, taken in kind be enough.
But, as fractions imply that we'd have to dissect,
And to cutting up Bishops I strongly object.
We've a small, fractious prelate whom well we could spare,
Who has just the same decimal worth, to a hair,
And, not to leave Ireland too much in the lurch.
We'll let her have Exeter, _sole_, as her Church.






LES HOMMES AUTOMATES.

1834.


    "We are persuaded that this our artificial man will not only walk and
    speak and perform most of the outward functions of animal life, but
    (being wound up once a week) will perhaps reason as well as most of
    your country parsons."--"_Memoirs of Martinus Scriblerus_,"
    chap. xii.


It being an object now to meet
With Parsons that dont want to eat,
Fit men to fill those Irish rectories,
Which soon will have but scant refectories,
It has been suggested,--lest that Church
Should all at once be left in the lurch
For want of reverend men endued
With this gift of never requiring food,--
To try, by way of experiment, whether
There couldnt be made of wood and leather,[1]
(Howe'er the notion may sound chimerical,)
Jointed figures, not _lay_,[2] but clerical,
Which, wound up carefully once a week,
Might just like parsons look and speak,
Nay even, if requisite, reason too,
As well as most Irish parsons do.

The experiment having succeeded quite,
(Whereat those Lords must much delight,
Who've shown, by stopping the Church's food,
They think it isnt for her spiritual good
To be served by parsons of flesh and blood,)
The Patentees of this new invention
Beg leave respectfully to mention,
They now are enabled to produce
An ample supply for present use,
Of these reverend pieces of machinery,
Ready for vicarage, rectory, deanery,
Or any such-like post of skill
That wood and leather are fit to fill.

N.B.--In places addicted to arson,
We cant recommend a wooden parson:
But if the Church any such appoints,
They'd better at least have iron joints.
In parts, not much by Protestants haunted,
A figure to _look at_'s all that's wanted--
A block in black, to eat and sleep,
Which (now that the eating's o'er) comes cheap.

P.S.--Should the Lords, by way of a treat,
Permit the clergy again to eat,
The Church will of course no longer need
Imitation-parsons that never feed;
And these _wood_ creatures of ours will sell
For secular purposes just as well--
Our Beresfords, turned to bludgeons stout,
May, 'stead of beating their own about,
Be knocking the brains of Papists out;
While our smooth O'Sullivans, by all means,
Should transmigrate into _turning_ machines.


[1] The materials of which those Nuremberg Savans, mentioned by
Scriblerus, constructed their artificial man.

[2] The wooden models used by painters are, it is well known, called "lay
figures".






HOW TO MAKE ONE'S SELF A PEER.

ACCORDING TO THE NEWEST RECEIPT AS DISCLOSED IN A LATE HERALDIC WORK,[1]

1834.


Choose some title that's dormant--the Peerage hath many--
Lord Baron of Shamdos sounds nobly as any.
Next, catch a dead cousin of said defunct Peer,
And marry him, off hand, in some given year,
To the daughter of somebody,--no matter who,--
Fig, the grocer himself, if you're hard run, will do;
For, the Medici _pills_ still in heraldry tell,
And why shouldn't _lollypops_ quarter as well?
Thus, having your couple, and one a lord's cousin,
Young materials for peers may be had by the dozen;
And 'tis hard if, inventing each small mother's son of 'em,
You can't somehow manage to prove _yourself_ one of 'em.

Should registers, deeds and such matters refractory,
Stand in the way of this lord-manufactory,
I've merely to hint, as a secret auricular,
One _grand_ rule of enterprise,--_don't_ be particular.
A man who once takes such a jump at nobility,
Must _not_ mince the matter, like folks of nihility,
But clear thick and thin with true lordly agility.

'Tis true, to a would-be descendant from Kings,
Parish-registers sometimes are troublesome things;
As oft, when the vision is near brought about,
Some goblin, in shape of a grocer, grins out;
Or some barber, perhaps, with my Lord mingles bloods,
And one's patent of peerage is left in the suds.

But there _are_ ways--when folks are resolved to be lords--
Of expurging even troublesome parish records.
What think ye of scissors? depend on't no heir
Of a Shamdos should go unsupplied with a pair,
As whate'er _else_ the learned in such lore may invent,
Your scissors does wonders in proving descent.
Yes, poets may sing of those terrible shears
With which Atropos snips off both bumpkins and peers,
But they're naught to that weapon which shines in the hands
Of some would-be Patricians, when proudly he stands
O'er the careless churchwarden's baptismal array,
And sweeps at each cut generations away.
By some babe of old times is his peerage resisted?

One snip,--and the urchin hath _never_ existed!
Does some marriage, in days near the Flood, interfere
With his one sublime object of being a Peer?
Quick the shears at once nullify bridegroom and bride,--
No such people have ever lived, married or died!

Such the newest receipt for those high minded elves,
Who've a fancy for making great lords of themselves.
Follow this, young aspirer who pant'st for a peerage,
Take S--m for thy model and B--z for thy steerage,
Do all and much worse than old Nicholas Flam does,
And--_who_ knows but you'll be Lord Baron of Shamdos?


[1] The claim to the barony of Chandos (if I recollect right) advanced by
the late Sir Egerinton Brydges.






THE DUKE IS THE LAD.


    Air.--"A master I have, and I am his man,
    Galloping dreary dun."
    "_Castle of Andalusia_."


The Duke is the lad to frighten a lass.
  Galloping, dreary duke;
  The Duke is the lad to frighten a lass,
  He's an ogre to meet, and the devil to pass,
      With his charger prancing,
      Grim eye glancing,
      Chin, like a Mufti,
      Grizzled and tufty,
    Galloping, dreary Duke.

Ye misses, beware of the neighborhood
  Of this galloping dreary Duke;
Avoid him, all who see no good
In being run o'er by a Prince of the Blood.
      For, surely, no nymph is
      Fond of a grim phiz.
      And of the married,
      Whole crowds have miscarried
  At sight of this dreary Duke.






EPISTLE

FROM ERASMUS ON EARTH TO CICERO IN THE SHADES.


Southampton.

As 'tis now, my dear Tully, some weeks since I started
By railroad for earth, having vowed ere we parted
To drop you a line by the Dead-Letter post,
Just to say how I thrive in my new line of ghost,
And how deucedly odd this live world all appears,
To a man who's been dead now for three hundred years,
I take up my pen, and with news of this earth
Hope to waken by turns both your spleen and your mirth.

In my way to these shores, taking Italy first,
Lest the change from Elysium too sudden should burst,
I forgot not to visit those haunts where of yore
You took lessons from Paetus in cookery's lore.
Turned aside from the calls of the rostrum and Muse,
To discuss the rich merits of _rtis_ and stews,
And preferred to all honors of triumph or trophy,
A supper on prawns with that rogue, little Sophy.

Having dwelt on such classical musings awhile,
I set off by a steam-boat for this happy isle,
(A conveyance _you_ ne'er, I think, sailed by, my Tully,
And therefore, _per_ next, I'll describe it more fully,)
Having heard on the way what distresses me greatly,
That England's o'errun by _idolaters_ lately,
Stark, staring adorers of wood and of stone,
Who will let neither stick, stock or statue alone.
Such the sad news I heard from a tall man in black,
Who from sports continental was hurrying back,
To look after his tithes;--seeing, doubtless, 'twould follow,
That just as of old your great idol, Apollo,
Devoured all the Tenths, so the idols in question,
These wood and stone gods, may have equal digestion,
And the idolatrous crew whom this Rector despises,
May eat up the tithe-pig which _he_ idolizes.

London.

'Tis all but too true--grim Idolatry reigns
In full pomp over England's lost cities and plains!
On arriving just now, as my first thought and care
Was as usual to seek out some near House of Prayer,
Some calm holy spot, fit for Christians to pray on,
I was shown to--what think you?--a downright Pantheon!

A grand, pillared temple with niches and halls,
Full of idols and gods, which they nickname St. Paul's;--
Tho' 'tis clearly the place where the idolatrous crew
Whom the Rector complained of, their dark rites pursue;
And, 'mong all the "strange gods" Abr'ham's father carved out,[1]
That he ever carv'd _stranger_ than these I much doubt.

  Were it even, my dear TULLY, your Hebes and Graces,
And such pretty things, that usurpt the Saints' places,
I shouldnt much mind,--for in this classic dome
Such folks from Olympus would feel quite at home.
But the gods they've got here!--such a queer omnium gatherum
Of misbegot things that no poet would father 'em;--
Britannias in light summer-wear for the skies,--
Old Thames turned to stone, to his no small surprise,--
Father Nile, too,--a portrait, (in spite of what's said,
That no mortal e'er yet got a glimpse of his _head_,)
And a Ganges which India would think somewhat fat for't,
Unless 'twas some full-grown Director had sat for't;--
Not to mention the _et caeteras_ of Genii and Sphinxes,
Fame, Victory, and other such semi-clad minxes;--
Sea Captains,[2]--the idols here most idolized;
And of whom some, alas! might too well be comprized
Among ready-made Saints, as they died _cannonized_;
With a multitude more of odd cockneyfied deities,
Shrined in such pomp that quite shocking to see it 'tis;
Nor know I what better the Rector could do
Than to shrine there his own beloved quadruped too;
As most surely a tithe-pig, whate'er the world thinks, is
A much fitter beast for a church than a Sphinx is.

  But I'm called off to dinner--grace just has been said,
And my host waits for nobody, living or dead.


[1] Joshua xxiv 2.

[2] Captains Mosse, Riou etc.






LINES ON THE DEPARTURE OF LORD CASTLEREAGH
AND STEWART FOR THE CONTINENT.[1]


    _at Paris[2] et Fratres, et qui rapure sub illis.
    vix tenuere manus (scis hoc, Menelae) nefandas_.
    OVID. _Metam. lib_. xiii. v. 202.


Go, Brothers in wisdom--go, bright pair of Peers,
  And my Cupid and Fame fan you both with their pinions!
The _one_, the best lover we have--_of his years_,
  And the other Prime Statesman of Britain's dominions.

Go, Hero of Chancery, blest with the smile
  Of the Misses that love and the monarchs that prize thee;
Forget Mrs. Angelo Taylor awhile,
  And all tailors but him who so well _dandifies_ thee.

Never mind how thy juniors in gallantry scoff,
  Never heed how perverse affidavits may thwart thee,
But show the young Misses thou'rt scholar enough
  To translate "_Amor Fortis_" a love, _about forty_!

And sure 'tis no wonder, when, fresh as young Mars,
  From the battle you came, with the Orders you'd earned in't,
That sweet Lady Fanny should cry out "_My stars_!"
  And forget that the _Moon_, too, was some way concerned in't.

For not the great Regent himself has endured
  (Tho' I've seen him with badges and orders all shine,
Till he lookt like a house that was _over_ insured)
  A much heavier burden of glories than thine.

And 'tis plain, when a wealthy young lady so mad is,
  Or _any_ young ladies can so go astray,
As to marry old Dandies that might be their daddies,
  The _stars_ are in fault, my Lord Stewart, not they!

Thou, too, t'other brother, thou Tully of Tories,
  Thou _Malaprop_ Cicero, over whose lips
Such a smooth rigmarole about; "monarchs," and "glories,"
  And "_nullidge_," and "features," like syllabub slips.

Go, haste, at the Congress pursue thy vocation
  Of adding fresh sums to this National Debt of ours,
Leaguing with Kings, who for mere recreation
  Break promises, fast as your Lordship breaks metaphors.

Fare ye well, fare ye well, bright Pair of Peers,
  And may Cupid and Fame fan you both with their pinions!
The one, the best lover we have--_of his years_,
And the other, Prime Statesman of Britain's dominions.


[1] This and the following squib, which must have been written about the
year 1815-16, have been by some oversight misplaced.

[2] Ovid is mistaken in saying that it was "at Paris" these rapacious
transactions took place--we should read "at Vienna."






TO THE SHIP IN WHICH LORD CASTLEREAGH SAILED FOR THE CONTINENT.

_Imitated from Horace, lib. i, ode 3_.


So may my Lady's prayers prevail,
  And Canning's too, and _lucid_ Bragge's,
And Eldon beg a favoring gale
  From Eolus, that _older_ Bags,
To speed thee on thy destined way,
Oh ship, that bearest our Castlereagh,
Our gracious Regent's better half
  And _therefore_ quarter of a King--
(As Van or any other calf
  May find without much figuring).
Waft him, oh ye kindly breezes,
  Waft this Lord of place and pelf,
Any where his Lordship pleases,
  Tho' 'twere to Old Nick himself!

Oh, what a face of brass was his.
Who first at Congress showed his phiz--
To sign away the Rights of Man
  To Russian threats and Austrian juggle;
And leave the sinking African
  To fall without one saving struggle--
'Mong ministers from North and South,
  To show his lack of shame and sense,
And hoist the sign of "Bull and Mouth"
  For blunders and for eloquence!

In vain we wish our _Secs_, at home
  To mind their papers, desks, and shelves,
If silly _Secs_, abroad _will_ roam
  And make such noodles of themselves.

But such hath always been the case--
For matchless impudence of face,
There's nothing like your Tory race!
First, Pitt, the chosen of England, taught her
A taste for famine, fire and slaughter.
Then came the Doctor, for our ease,
With Eldons, Chathams, Hawksburies,
And other deadly maladies.
When each in turn had run their rigs,
Necessity brought in the Whigs:

And oh! I blush, I blush to say,
  When these, in turn, were put to flight, too,
Illustrious TEMPLE flew away
  With _lots of pens he had no right to_.[1]
In short, what _will_ not mortal man do?
  And now, that--strife and bloodshed past--
We've done on earth what harm we can do,
  We gravely take to heaven at last
And think its favoring smile to purchase
(Oh Lord, good Lord!) by--building churches!


[1] This alludes to the 1200_l_. worth of stationery, which his Lordship
is said to have ordered, when on the point of _vacating_ his place.






SKETCH OF THE FIRST ACT OF A NEW ROMANTIC DRAMA.


"And now," quoth the goddess, in accents jocose,
"Having got good materials, I'll brew such a dose
"Of Double X mischief as, mortals shall say,
"They've not known its equal for many a long day."
Here she winkt to her subaltern imps to be steady,
And all wagged their fire-tipt tails and stood ready.

"So, now for the ingredients:--first, hand me that bishop;"
Whereupon, a whole bevy of imps run to fish up
From out a large reservoir wherein they pen 'em
The blackest of all its black dabblers in venom;
And wrapping him up (lest the virus should ooze,
And one "drop of the immortal"[1] Right Rev.[2] they might lose)
In the sheets of his own speeches, charges, reviews,
Pop him into the caldron, while loudly a burst
From the by-standers welcomes ingredient the first!

"Now fetch the Ex-Chancellor," muttered the dame--
"He who's called after Harry the Older, by name."
"The Ex-Chancellor!" echoed her imps, the whole crew of 'em--
"Why talk of _one_ Ex, when your Mischief has _two_ of 'em?"
"True, true," said the hag, looking arch at her elves,
"And a double-_Ex_ dose they compose, in themselves."
This joke, the sly meaning of which was seen lucidly,
Set all the devils a laughing most deucedly.
So, in went the pair, and (what none thought surprising)
Showed talents for sinking as great as for rising;
While not a grim phiz in that realm but was lighted
With joy to see spirits so twin-like united--
Or (plainly to speak) two such birds of a feather,
In one mess of venom thus spitted together.
Here a flashy imp rose--some connection, no doubt,
Of the young lord in question--and, scowling about,
"Hoped his fiery friend, Stanley, would not be left out;
"As no schoolboy unwhipt, the whole world must agree,
"Loved mischief, _pure_ mischief, more dearly than he."

But, no--the wise hag wouldnt hear of the whipster;
Not merely because, as a shrew, he eclipst her,
And nature had given him, to keep him still young,
Much tongue in his head and no head in his tongue;
But because she well knew that, for change ever ready,
He'd not even to mischief keep properly steady:
That soon even the _wrong_ side would cease to delight,
And, for want of a change, he must swerve to the _right_;
While, on _each_, so at random his missiles he threw,
That the side he attackt was most safe, of the two.--
This ingredient was therefore put by on the shelf,
There to bubble, a bitter, hot mess, by itself.
"And now," quoth the hag, as her caldron she eyed.
And the tidbits so friendlily rankling inside,
"There wants but some seasoning;--so, come, ere I stew 'em,
"By way of a relish we'll throw in John Tuam.'
"In cooking up mischief, there's no flesh or fish
"Like your meddling High Priest, to add zest to the dish."
Thus saying, she pops in the Irish Grand Lama--
Which great event ends the First Act of the Drama.


[1] To lose no drop of the immortal man.

[2] The present Bishop of Exeter.






ANIMAL MAGNETISM.


Tho' famed was Mesmer, in his day,
Nor less so, in ours, is Dupotet,
To say nothing of all the wonders done
By that wizard, Dr. Elliotson,
When, standing as if the gods to invoke, he
Up waves his arm, and--down drops Okey![1]
Tho' strange these things, to mind and sense,
  If you wish still stranger things to see--
If you wish to know the power immense
Of the true magnetic influence,
  Just go to her Majesty's Treasury,
And learn the wonders working there--
And I'll be hanged if you dont stare!
Talk of your animal magnetists,
And that wave of the hand no soul resists,
Not all its witcheries can compete
With the friendly beckon towards Downing Street,
Which a Premier gives to one who wishes
To taste of the Treasury loaves and fishes.
It actually lifts the lucky elf,
Thus acted upon, _above_ himself;--
He jumps to a state of _clairvoyance_,
And is placeman, statesman, all, at once!

These effects, observe (with which I begin),
Take place when the patient's motioned _in_;
Far different of course the mode of affection,
When the wave of the hand's in the _out_ direction;
The effects being then extremely unpleasant,
As is seen in the case of Lord Brougham, at present;
In whom this sort of manipulation,
Has lately produced such inflammation,
Attended with constant irritation,
That, in short--not to mince his situation--
It has workt in the man a transformation
That puzzles all human calculation!
Ever since the fatal day which saw
That "pass" performed on this Lord of Law--
A pass potential, none can doubt,
As it sent Harry Brougham to the right about--
The condition in which the patient has been
Is a thing quite awful to be seen.
Not that a casual eye could scan
  This wondrous change by outward survey;
It being, in fact, the _interior_ man
  That's turned completely topsy-turvy:--
Like a case that lately, in reading o'er 'em,
I found in the _Acta Eruditorum_,
Of a man in whose inside, when disclosed,
The whole order of things was found transposed;
By a _lusus naturae_, strange to see,
The liver placed where the heart should be,
And the _spleen_ (like Brougham's, since laid on the shelf)
As diseased and as much _out of place_ as himself.

In short, 'tis a case for consultation,
If e'er there was one, in this thinking nation;
And therefore I humbly beg to propose,
That those _savans_ who mean, as the rumor goes,
To sit on Miss Okey's wonderful case,
Should also Lord Parry's case embrace;
And inform us, in _both_ these patients' states,
Which _ism_ it is that predominates,
Whether magnetism and somnambulism,
Or, simply and solely, mountebankism.


[1] The name of the heroine of the performances at the North London
Hospital.






THE SONG OF THE BOX.


Let History boast of her Romans and Spartans,
And tell how they stood against tyranny's shock;
They were all, I confess, in _my_ eye, Betty Martins
  Compared to George Grote and his wonderful Box.

Ask, where Liberty now has her seat?--Oh, it isn't
  By Delaware's banks or on Switzerland's rocks;--
Like an imp in some conjuror's bottle imprisoned,
  She's slyly shut up in Grote's wonderful Box.

How snug!--'stead of floating thro' ether's dominions,
  Blown _this_ way and _that_, by the "_populi vox_,"
To fold thus in silence her sinecure pinions,
  And go fast asleep in Grote's wonderful Box.

Time was, when free speech was the life-breath of freedom--
  So thought once the Seldens, the Hampdens, the Lockes;
But mute be _our_ troops, when to ambush we lead 'em,
  "For Mum" is the word with us Knights of the Box.

Pure, exquisite Box! no corruption can soil it;
  There's Otto of Rose in each breath it unlocks;
While Grote is the "Betty," that serves at the toilet,
  And breathes all Arabia around from his Box.

'Tis a singular fact, that the famed Hugo Grotius
  (A namesake of Grote's--being both of Dutch stocks),
Like Grote, too, a genius profound as precocious,
  Was also, like him, much renowned for a Box;--

An immortal old clothes-box, in which the great Grotius
  When suffering in prison for views heterodox,
Was packt up incog. spite of jailers ferocious,[1]
  And sent to his wife,[2] carriage free, in a Box!

But the fame of old Hugo now rests on the shelf,
  Since a rival hath risen that all parallel mocks;--
_That_ Grotius ingloriously saved but himself,
  While _ours_ saves the whole British realm by a Box!

And oh! when, at last, even this greatest of Grotes
  Must bend to the Power that at every door knocks,
May he drop in the urn like his own "silent votes,"
  And the tomb of his rest be a large Ballot-Box.

While long at his shrine, both from county and city,
  Shall pilgrims triennially gather in flocks,
And sing, while they whimper, the appropriate ditty,
  "Oh breathe not his _name_, let it sleep--in the Box."


[1] For the particulars of this escape of Grotius from the Castle of
Louvenstein, by means of a box (only three feet and a half long, it is
said) in which books used to be occasionally sent to him and foul linen
returned, see any of the Biographical Dictionaries.

[2] This is not quite according to the facts of the case; his wife having
been the contriver of the stratagem, and remained in the prison herself to
give him time for escape.






ANNOUNCEMENT OF A NEW THALABA.

ADDRESSED TO ROBERT SOUTHEY, ESQ.


When erst, my Southey, thy tuneful tongue
The terrible tale of Thalaba sung--
Of him, the Destroyer, doomed to rout
That grim divan of conjurors out,
Whose dwelling dark, as legends say,
Beneath the roots of the ocean lay,
(Fit place for deep ones, such as they,)
How little thou knewest, dear Dr. Southey,
Altho' bright genius all allow thee,
That, some years thence, thy wondering eyes
Should see a second Thalaba rise--
As ripe for ruinous rigs as thine,
Tho' his havoc lie in a different line,
And should find this new, improved Destroyer
Beneath the wig of a Yankee lawyer;
A sort of an "alien," _alias_ man,
Whose country or party guess who can,
Being Cockney half, half Jonathan;
And his life, to make the thing completer,
Being all in the genuine Thalaba metre,
Loose and irregular as thy feet are;--
First, into Whig Pindarics rambling,
Then in low Tory doggrel scrambling;
Now _love_ his theme, now _Church_ his glory
(At once both Tory and ama-tory),
Now in the Old Bailey-_lay_ meandering,
Now in soft _couplet_ style philandering;
And, lastly, in lame Alexandrine,
Dragging his wounded length along,
When scourged by Holland's silken thong.

In short, dear Bob, Destroyer the Second
May fairly a match for the First be reckoned;
Save that _your_ Thalaba's talent lay
In sweeping old conjurors clean away,
While ours at aldermen deals his blows,
(Who no great conjurors are, God knows,)
Lays Corporations, by wholesale, level,
Sends Acts of Parliament to the devil,
Bullies the whole Milesian race--
Seven millions of Paddies, face to face;
And, seizing that magic wand, himself,
Which erst thy conjurors left on the shelf,
Transforms the boys of the Boyne and Liffey
All into _foreigners_, in a jiffy--
Aliens, outcasts, every soul of 'em,
Born but for whips and chains, the whole of 'em?

Never in short did parallel
Betwixt two heroes _gee_ so well;
And among the points in which they fit,
There's one, dear Bob, I cant omit.
That hacking, hectoring blade of thine
Dealt much in the _Domdaniel_ line;
And 'tis but rendering justice due,
To say that ours and his Tory crew
_Damn Daniel_ most devoutly too.






RIVAL TOPICS.[1]

AN EXTRAVAGANZA.


Oh Wellington and Stephenson,
  Oh morn and evening papers,
_Times_, _Herald_, _Courier_, _Globe_, and _Sun_,
When will ye cease our ears to stun
  With these two heroes' capers?
Still "Stephenson" and "Wellington,"
  The everlasting two!--
Still doomed, from rise to set of sun,
To hear what mischief one has done,
  And t'other means to do:--
What bills the banker past to friends,
  But never meant to pay;
What Bills the other wight intends,
  As honest, in their way;--
Bills, payable at distant sight,
  Beyond the Grecian kalends,
When all good deeds will come to light,
When Wellington will do what's right,
  And Rowland pay his balance.

To catch the banker all have sought,
  But still the rogue unhurt is;
While t'other juggler--who'd have thought?
Tho' slippery long, has just been caught
  By old Archbishop Curtis;--
And, such the power of papal crook,
  The crosier scarce had quivered
About his ears, when, lo! the Duke
  Was of a Bull delivered!
Sir Richard Birnie doth decide
  That Rowland "must be mad,"
In private coach, with crest, to ride,
  When chaises could be had.
And t'other hero, all agree,
  St. Luke's will soon arrive at,
If thus he shows off publicly,
  When he might pass in private.
Oh Wellington, oh Stephenson,
  Ye ever-boring pair,
Where'er I sit, or stand, or run,
  Ye haunt me everywhere.
Tho' Job had patience tough enough,
  Such duplicates would try it;
Till one's turned out and t'other off,
  We Shan have peace or quiet.
But small's the chance that Law affords--
  Such folks are daily let off;
And, 'twixt the old Bailey and the Lords,
  They both, I fear, will get off.


[1] The date of this squib must have been, I think, about 1828-9.






THE BOY STATESMAN.

BY A TORY.


    "That boy will be the death of me."
    _Matthews at Home_.


Ah, Tories dear, our ruin is near,
  With Stanley to help us, we cant but fall;
Already a warning voice I hear,
Like the late Charles Matthews' croak in my ear,
  "That boy--that boy'll be the death of you all."

He will, God help us!--not even Scriblerius
  In the "Art of Sinking" his match could be;
And our case is growing exceeding serious,
  For, all being in the same boat as he,
  If down my Lord goes, down go we,
  Lord Baron Stanley and Company,
As deep in Oblivion's swamp below
As such "Masters Shallow," well could go;
And where we shall all both low and high,
Embalmed in mud, as forgotten lie
As already doth Graham of Netherby!
But that boy, that boy!--there's a tale I know,
Which in talking of him comes _propos_.
Sir Thomas More had an only son,
And a foolish lad was that only one,
  And Sir Thomas said one day to his wife,
"My dear, I cant but wish you joy.
"For you prayed for a boy, and you now have a boy,
"Who'll continue a boy to the end of his life."

Even such is our own distressing lot,
With the ever-young statesman we have got;
Nay even still worse; for Master More
Wasn't more a youth than he'd been before,
While _ours_ such power of boyhood shows,
That the older he gets the more juvenile he grows,
And at what extreme old age he'll close
His schoolboy course, heaven only knows;--
Some century hence, should he reach so far,
  And ourselves to witness it heaven condemn,
We shall find him a sort of _cub_ Old Parr,
  A whipper-snapper Methusalem;
Nay, even should he make still longer stay of it,
The boy'll want _judgment_, even to the day of it!
Meanwhile, 'tis a serious, sad infliction;
  And day and night with awe I recall
The late Mr. Matthews' solemn prediction,
  "That boy'll be the death, the death of you all."






LETTER

FROM LARRY O'BRANIGAN TO THE REV. MURTHAGH O'MULLIGAN.


Arrah, where were _you_, Murthagh, that beautiful day?--
  Or how came it your riverence was laid on the shelf,
When that poor craythur, Bobby--as _you_ were away--
  Had to make _twice_ as big a Tomfool of _himself_.

Troth, it wasnt at all civil to lave in the lurch
  A boy so deserving your tindhr'est affection:--
Too such iligant Siamase twins of the Church,
  As Bob and yourself, ne'er should cut the connection.

If thus in two different directions you pull,
  'Faith, they'll swear that yourself and your riverend brother
Are like those quare foxes, in Gregory's Bull,
  Whose tails were joined _one_ way, while they lookt
_another_![1]

Och blest be he, whosomdever he be,
  That helpt soft Magee to that Bull of a Letther!
Not even my own self, tho' I sometimes make free
  At such bull-manufacture, could make him a betther.

To be sure, when a lad takes to _forgin_', this way,
  'Tis a thrick he's much timpted to carry on gayly;
Till, at last, his "injanious devices,"[2]
  Show him up, not at Exether Hall, but the Ould Bailey.

That parsons should forge thus appears mighty odd,
  And (as if somethin' "odd" in their _names_, too, must be,)
_One_ forger, of ould, was a riverend Dod,
  "While a riverend Todd's now his match, to a T.[3]

But, no matther _who_ did it all blessin's betide him,
  For dishin' up Bob, in a manner so nate;
And there wanted but _you_, Murthagh 'vourneen, beside him,
  To make the whole grand dish of _bull_-calf complate.


[1] "You will increase the enmity with which they are regarded by their
associates in heresy, thus tying these foxes by the tails, that their
faces may tend in opposite directions."--Bob's _Bull_ read, at Exeter
Hall, July 14.

[2] "An ingenious device of my learned friend."--Bob's _Letter to
Standard_.

[3] Had I consulted only my own wishes, I should not have allowed this
hasty at tack on Dr. Todd to have made its appearance in this Collection;
being now fully convinced that the charge brought against that reverend
gentleman of intending to pass off as genuine his famous mock Papal Letter
was altogether unfounded. Finding it to be the wish, however, of my
reverend friend--as I am now glad to be permitted to call him--that both
the wrong and the reparation, the Ode and, the Palinode, should be thus
placed in juxtaposition, I have thought it but due to him, to comply with
his request.






MUSINGS OF AN UNREFORMED PEER.


Of all the odd plans of this monstrously queer age,
The oddest is that of reforming the peerage;--
Just as if we, great dons, with a title and star,
Did not get on exceedingly well as we are,
And perform all the functions of noodles by birth
As completely as any born noodles on earth.

How _acres_ descend, is in law-books displayed,
But we as _wise_acres descend, ready made;
And by right of our rank in Debrett's nomenclature,
Are all of us born legislators by nature;--
Like ducklings to water instinctively taking,
So we with like quackery take to lawmaking;
And God forbid any reform should come o'er us,
To make us more wise than our sires were before us.

The Egyptians of old the same policy knew--
If your sire was a cook, you must be a cook too:
Thus making, from father to son, a good trade of it,
Poisoners _by right_ (so no more could be said of it),
The cooks like our lordships a pretty mess made of it;
While, famed for _conservative_ stomachs, the Egyptians
Without a wry face bolted all the prescriptions.

It is true, we've among us some peers of the past,
Who keep pace with the present most awfully fast--
Fruits that ripen beneath the new light now arising
With speed that to _us_, old conserves, is surprising.
Conserves, in whom--potted, for grandmamma uses--
'Twould puzzle a sunbeam to find any juices.
'Tis true too. I fear, midst the general movement,
Even _our_ House, God help it, is doomed to improvement,
And all its live furniture, nobly descended
But sadly worn out, must be sent to be mended.
With _movables_ 'mong us, like Brougham and like Durham,
No wonder even _fixtures_ should learn to bestir 'em;
And distant, ye gods, be that terrible day,
When--as playful Old Nick, for his pastime, they say,
Flies off with old houses, sometimes, in a storm--
So _ours_ may be whipt off, some night, by Reform;
And as up, like Loretto's famed house,[1] thro' the air,
Not angels, but devils, our lordships shall bear,
Grim, radical phizzes, unused to the sky,
Shall flit round, like cherubs, to wish us "good-by,"
While perched up on clouds little imps of plebeians,
Small Grotes and O'Connells, shall sing Io Paeans.


[1] The _Casa Santa_, supposed to have been carried by angels through
the air from Galilee to Italy.






THE REVEREND PAMPHLETEER.

A ROMANTIC BALLAD.


Oh, have you heard what hapt of late?
  If not, come lend an ear,
While sad I state the piteous fate
  Of the Reverend Pamphleteer.

All praised his skilful jockeyship,
  Loud rung the Tory cheer,
While away, away, with spur and whip,
  Went the Reverend Pamphleteer.

The nag he rode--how _could_ it err?
  'Twas the same that took, last year,
That wonderful jump to Exeter
  With the Reverend Pamphleteer.

Set a beggar on horseback, wise men say,
  The course he will take is clear:
And in _that_ direction lay the way
  Of the Reverend Pamphleteer,

"Stop, stop," said Truth, but vain her cry--
  Left far away in the rear,
She heard but the usual gay "Good-by"
  From her faithless Pamphleteer.

You may talk of the jumps of Homer's gods,
  When cantering o'er our sphere--
I'd back for a _bounce_, 'gainst any odds,
  This Reverend Pamphleteer.

But ah! what tumbles a jockey hath!
  In the midst of his career,
A file of the _Times_ lay right in the path
  Of the headlong Pamphleteer.

Whether he tript or shyed thereat,
  Doth not so clear appear:
But down he came, as his sermons flat--
 This Reverend Pamphleteer!

Lord King himself could scarce desire
  To see a spiritual Peer
Fall much more dead, in the dirt and mire,
  Than did this Pamphleteer.

Yet pitying parsons many a day
  Shall visit his silent bier,
And, thinking the while of Stanhope, say
  "Poor dear old Pamphleteer!

"He has finisht at last his busy span,
  "And now _lies coolly_ here--
"As often he did in life, good man,
  "Good, Reverend Pamphleteer!"






RECENT DIALOGUE.

1825.


A Bishop and a bold dragoon,
  Both heroes in their way,
Did thus, of late, one afternoon,
  Unto each other say:--
"Dear bishop," quoth the brave huzzar,
  "As nobody denies
"That you a wise logician are,
  "And I am--otherwise,
"'Tis fit that in this question, we
  "Stick each to his own art--
"That _yours_ should be the sophistry,
  "And _mine_ the _fighting_ part.
"My creed, I need not tell you, is
  "Like that of Wellington,
"To whom no harlot comes amiss,
  "Save her of Babylon;
"And when we're at a loss for words,
  "If laughing reasoners flout us,
"For lack of sense we'll draw our swords--
  "The sole thing sharp about us."--

"Dear bold dragoon," the bishop said,
  "'Tis true for war thou art meant;
"And reasoning--bless that dandy head!
  "Is not in thy department.
"So leave the argument to me--
  "And, when my holy labor
"Hath lit the fires of bigotry,
  "Thou'lt poke them with thy sabre.
"From pulpit and from sentrybox,
  "We'll make our joint attacks,
"I at the head of my _Cassocks_,
  "And you, of your _Cossacks_.
"So here's your health, my brave huzzar,
  "My exquisite old fighter--
"Success to bigotry and war,
  "The musket and the mitre!"
Thus prayed the minister of heaven--
  While York, just entering then,
Snored out (as if some _Clerk_ had given
  His nose the cue) "Amen."






THE WELLINGTON SPA.


    "And drink _oblivion_ to our woes."
    Anna Matilda.


1829.


Talk no more of your Cheltenham and Harrowgate springs,
  'Tis from _Lethe_ we now our potations must draw;
Yon _Lethe_'s a cure for--all possible things,
  And the doctors have named it the Wellington Spa.

Other physical waters but cure you in part;
  _One_ cobbles your gout--_t'other_ mends your digestion--
Some settle your stomach, but _this_--bless your heart!--
  It will settle for ever your Catholic Question.

Unlike too the potions in fashion at present,
  This Wellington nostrum, restoring by stealth,
So purges the memory of all that's unpleasant,
  That patients _forget_ themselves into rude health.
For instance, the inventor--his having once said
  "He should think himself mad if at _any one's_ call,
"He became what he is"--is so purged from his head
  That he now doesnt think he's a madman at all.
Of course, for your memories of very long standing--
  Old chronic diseases that date back undaunted
To Brian Boroo and Fitz-Stephens' first landing--
  A devil of a dose of the _Lethe_ is wanted.

But even Irish patients can hardly regret
  An oblivion so much in their own native style,
So conveniently planned that, whate'er they forget,
  They may go on remembering it still all the while!






A CHARACTERLESS

1834.


Half Whig, half Tory, like those mid-way things,
'Twixt bird and beast, that by mistake have wings;
A mongrel Stateman, 'twixt two factions nurst,
Who, of the faults of each, combines the worst--
The Tory's loftiness, the Whigling's sneer,
The leveller's rashness, and the bigot's fear:
The thirst for meddling, restless still to show
How Freedom's clock, repaired by Whigs, will go;
The alarm when others, more sincere than they,
Advance the hands to the true time of day.

By Mother Church, high-fed and haughty dame,
The boy was dandled, in his dawn of fame;
Listening, she smiled, and blest the flippant tongue
On which the fate of unborn tithe-pigs hung.
Ah! who shall paint the grandam's grim dismay,
When loose Reform enticed her boy away;
When shockt she heard him ape the rabble's tone,
And in Old Sarum's fate foredoom her own!
Groaning she cried, while tears rolled down her cheeks,
"Poor, glib-tongued youth, he means not what he speaks.
"Like oil at top, these Whig professions flow,
"But, pure as lymph, runs Toryism below.
"Alas! that tongue should start thus, in the race,
"Ere mind can reach and regulate its pace!--
"For, once outstript by tongue, poor, lagging mind,
"At every step, still further limps behind.
"But, bless the boy!--whate'er his wandering be,
"Still turns his heart to Toryism and me.
"Like those odd shapes, portrayed in Dante's lay.
"With heads fixt on, the wrong and backward way,
"His feet and eyes pursue a diverse track,
"While _those_ march onward, _these_ look fondly back."
And well she knew him--well foresaw the day,
Which now hath come, when snatched from Whigs away
The self-same changeling drops the mask he wore,
And rests, restored, in granny's arms once more.

But whither now, mixt brood of modern light
And ancient darkness, canst thou bend thy flight?
Tried by both factions and to neither true,
Feared by the _old_ school, laught at by the _new_;
For _this_ too feeble and for _that_ too rash,
_This_ wanting more of fire, _that_ less of flash,
Lone shalt thou stand, in isolation cold,
Betwixt two worlds, the new one and the old,
A small and "vext Bermoothes," which the eye
Of venturous seaman sees--and passes by.






A GHOST STORY.

To THE AIR OF "UNFORTUNATE MISS BAILEY."

1835.


Not long in bed had Lyndhurst lain,
  When, as his lamp burned dimly,
The ghosts of corporate bodies slain,[1]
  Stood by his bedside grimly.
Dead aldermen who once could feast,
  But now, themselves, are fed on,
And skeletons of mayors deceased,
  This doleful chorus led on:--
        Oh Lord Lyndhurst,
        "Unmerciful Lord Lyndhurst,
          "Corpses we,
          "All burkt by thee,
        "Unmerciful Lord Lyndhurst!"

"Avaunt, ye frights!" his Lordship cried,
  "Ye look most glum and whitely."
"Ah, Lyndhurst dear!" the frights replied,
  "You've used us unpolitely.
"And now, ungrateful man! to drive
  "Dead bodies from your door so,
"Who quite corrupt enough, alive,
  "You've made by death still more so.
        "Oh, Ex-Chancellor,
      "Destructive Ex-Chancellor,
        "See thy work,
        "Thou second Burke,
      "Destructive Ex-Chancellor!"

Bold Lyndhurst then, whom naught could keep
  Awake or surely _that_ would,
Cried "Curse you all"--fell fast asleep--
  And dreamt of "Small _v_. Attwood."
While, shockt, the bodies flew downstairs,
  But courteous in their panic
Precedence gave to ghosts of mayors,
  And corpses aldermanic,
      Crying, "Oh, Lord Lyndhurst,
      "That terrible Lord Lyndhurst,
        "Not Old Scratch
        "Himself could match
      "That terrible Lord Lyndhurst."


[1] Referring to the line taken by Lord Lyndhurst, on the question of
Municipal Reform.






THOUGHTS ON THE LATE DESTRUCTIVE PROPOSITIONS OF THE TORIES.[1]

BY A COMMON-COUNCILMAN.

1835.


I sat me down in my easy chair,
  To read, as usual, the morning papers;
But--who shall describe my look of despair,
  When I came to Lefroy's "destructive" capers!
That _he_--that, of all live men, Lefroy
Should join in the cry "Destroy, destroy!"
Who, even when a babe, as I've heard said,
On Orange conserve was chiefly fed,
And never, till now, a movement made
That wasnt manfully retrograde!
Only think--to sweep from the light of day
Mayors, maces, criers and wigs away;
To annihilate--never to rise again--
A whole generation of aldermen,
Nor leave them even the accustomed tolls,
To keep together their bodies and souls!--
At a time too when snug posts and places
  Are falling away from us one by one,
Crash--crash--like the mummy-cases
  Belzoni, in Egypt, sat upon,
Wherein lay pickled, in state sublime,
Conservatives of the ancient time;--
To choose such a moment to overset
The few snug nuisances left us yet;
To add to the ruin that round us reigns,
By knocking out mayors' and town-clerks' brains;
By dooming all corporate bodies to fall,
Till they leave at last no bodies at all--
Naught but the ghosts of by-gone glory,
Wrecks of a world that once was Tory!--
Where pensive criers, like owls unblest,
  Robbed of their roosts, shall still hoot o'er them:
  Nor _mayors_ shall know where to seek a _nest_,
  Till Gaily Knight shall _find_ one for them;--
Till mayors and kings, with none to rue 'em,
  Shall perish all in one common plague;
And the _sovereigns_ of Belfast and Tuam
  Must join their brother, Charles Dix, at Prague.

Thus mused I, in my chair, alone,
(As above described) till dozy grown,
And nodding assent to my own opinions,
I found myself borne to sleep's dominions,
Where, lo! before my dreaming eyes,
A new House of Commons appeared to rise,
Whose living contents, to fancy's survey,
Seemed to me all turned topsy-turvy--
A jumble of polypi--nobody knew
Which was the head or which the queue.
_Here_, Inglis, turned to a sansculotte,
Was dancing the hays with Hume and Grote;
_There_, ripe for riot, Recorder Shaw
Was learning from Roebuck "aira:"
While Stanley and Graham, as _poissarde_ wenches,
Screamed "_-bas_!" from the Tory benches;
And Peel and O'Connell, cheek by jowl,
Were dancing an Irish carmagnole.

The Lord preserve us!--if dreams come true,
What _is_ this hapless realm to do?


[1] These verses were written in reference to the Bill brought in at this
time, for the reform of Corporations, and the sweeping amendments proposed
by Lord Lyndhurst and other Tory Peers, in order to obstruct the measure.






ANTICIPATED MEETING OF THE BRITISH ASSOCIATION IN THE YEAR 1836.

1836


After some observations from Dr. M'Grig
On that fossil reliquium called Petrified Wig,
Or _Perruquolithus_--a specimen rare
Of those wigs made for antediluvian wear,
Which, it seems, stood the Flood without turning a hair--
Mr. Tomkins rose up, and requested attention
To facts no less wondrous which he had to mention.

Some large fossil creatures had lately been found,
Of a species no longer now seen above ground,
But the same (as to Tomkins most clearly appears)
With those animals, lost now for hundreds of years,
Which our ancestors used to call "Bishops" and "Peers,"
But which Tomkins more erudite names has bestowed on,
Having called the Peer fossil the _Aris_-tocratodon,[1]
And, finding much food under t'other one's thorax,
Has christened that creature the Episcopus Vorax.

Lest the _savantes_ and dandies should think this all fable,
Mr. Tomkins most kindly produced, on the table,
A sample of each of these species of creatures,
Both tolerably human, in structure and features,
Except that the Episcopus seems, Lord deliver us!
To've been carnivorous as well as granivorous;
And Tomkins, on searching its stomach, found there
Large lumps, such as no modern stomach could bear,
Of a substance called Tithe, upon which, as 'tis said,
The whole _Genus Clericum_ formerly fed;
And which having lately himself decompounded,
Just to see what 'twas made of, he actually found it
Composed of all possible cookable things
That e'er tript upon trotters or soared upon wings--
All products of earth, both gramineous, herbaceous,
Hordeaceous, fabaceous and eke farinaceous,
All clubbing their quotas, to glut the oesophagus
Of this ever greedy and grasping Tithophagus.[2]
"Admire," exclaimed Tomkins. "the kind dispensation
"By Providence shed on this much-favored nation,
"In sweeping so ravenous a race from the earth,
"That might else have occasioned a general dearth--
"And thus burying 'em, deep as even Joe Hume would sink 'em,
"With the Ichthyosaurus and Paloeorynchum,
"And other queer _ci-devant_ things, under ground--
"Not forgetting that fossilized youth,[3] so renowned,
"Who lived just to witness the Deluge--was gratified
"Much by the sight, and has since been found _stratified_!"

This picturesque touch--quite in Tomkins's way--
Called forth from the _savantes_ a general hurrah;
While inquiries among them, went rapidly round,
As to where this young stratified man could be found.
The "learned Theban's" discourse next as livelily flowed on,
To sketch t'other wonder, the _Aris_tocratodon--
An animal, differing from most human creatures
Not so much in speech, inward structure or features,
As in having a certain excrescence, T. said,
Which in form of a coronet grew from its head,
And devolved to its heirs, when the creature was dead;
Nor mattered it, while this heirloom was transmitted,
How unfit were the _heads_, so the _coronet_ fitted.

He then mentioned a strange zological fact,
Whose announcement appeared much applause to attract.
In France, said the learned professor, this race
Had so noxious become, in some centuries' space,
From their numbers and strength, that the land was o'errun with 'em,
Every one's question being, "What's to be done with em?"
When, lo! certain knowing ones--_savans_, mayhap,
Who, like Buckland's deep followers, understood _trap_,[4]
Slyly hinted that naught upon earth was so good
For _Aris_tocratodons, when rampant and rude,
As to stop or curtail their allowance of food.
This expedient was tried and a proof it affords
Of the effect that short commons will have upon lords;
For this whole race of bipeds, one fine summer's morn,
Shed their coronets, just as a deer sheds his horn,
And the moment these gewgaws fell off, they became
Quite a new sort of creature--so harmless and tame,
That zologists might, for the first time, maintain 'em
To be near akin to the _genius humanum_,
And the experiment, tried so successfully then,
Should be kept in remembrance when wanted again.


[1] A term formed on the model of the Mastodon, etc.

[2] The zological term for a tithe-eater.

[3] The man found by Scheuchzer, and supposed by him to have witnessed the
Deluge ("_homo diluvii testis_"), but who turned out, I am sorry to
say, to be merely a great lizard.

[4] Particularly the formation called _Transition_ Trap.

       *       *       *       *       *






SONG OF THE CHURCH.

No. 1.

LEAVE ME ALONE.

A PASTORAL BALLAD.


    "We are ever standing on the defensive. All that we say to them is,
    '_leave us alone_.' The Established Church is part and parcel of
    the constitution of this country. You are bound to conform to this
    constitution. We ask of you nothing more:--_let us alone_."
    --Letter in _The Times_, Nov. 1838.


1838.


Come, list to my pastoral tones,
  In clover my shepherds I keep;
My stalls are well furnisht with drones,
  Whose preaching invites one to sleep.
At my _spirit_ let infidels scoff,
  So they leave but the _substance_ my own;
For in sooth I'm extremely well off
  If the world will but let me alone.

Dissenters are grumblers, we know;--
  Tho' excellent men in their way,
They never like things to be _so_,
  Let things be however they may.
But dissenting's a trick I detest;
  And besides 'tis an axiom well known,
The creed that's best paid is the best,
  If the _un_paid would let it alone.

To me, I own, very surprising
  Your Newmans and Puseys all seem,
Who start first with rationalizing,
  Then jump to the other extreme.
Far better, 'twixt nonsense and sense,
  A nice _half_-way concern, like our own,
Where piety's mixt up with pence,
  And the latter are _ne'er_ left alone.

Of all our tormentors, the Press is
  The one that most tears us to bits;
And now, Mrs. Woolfrey's "excesses"
  Have thrown all its imps into fits.
The devils have been at us, for weeks,
  And there's no saying when they'll have done;--
Oh dear! how I wish Mr. Breeks
  Had left Mrs. Woolfrey alone!

If any need pray for the dead,
  'Tis those to whom post-obits fall;
Since wisely hath Solomon said,
  'Tis "money that answereth all."
But ours be the patrons who _live_;-
  For, once in their glebe they are thrown,
The dead have no living to give,
  And therefore we leave them alone.

Tho' in morals we may not excel,
  Such perfection is rare to be had;
A good life is, of course, very well,
  But good living is also-not bad.
And when, to feed earth-worms, I go.
Let this epitaph stare from my stone,
"Here lies the Right Rev. so and so;
  "Pass, stranger, and--leave him alone."






EPISTLE FROM HENRY OF EXETER TO JOHN OF TUAM.


Dear John, as I know, like our brother of London,
You've sipt of all knowledge, both sacred and mundane,
No doubt, in some ancient Joe Miller, you've read
What Cato, that cunning old Roman, once said--
That he ne'er saw two reverend sooth-say ers meet,
Let it be where it might, in the shrine or the street,
Without wondering the rogues, mid their solemn grimaces,
Didnt burst out a laughing in each other's faces.
What Cato then meant, tho' 'tis so long ago,
Even we in the present times pretty well know;
Having soothsayers also, who--sooth to say, John--
Are no better in some points than those of days gone,
And a pair of whom, meeting (between you and me),
Might laugh in their sleeves, too--all lawn tho' they be.

But this, by the way--my intention being chiefly
In this, my first letter, to hint to you briefly,
That, seeing how fond you of _Tuum_[1] must be,
While _Meum's_ at all times the main point with me,
We scarce could do better than form an alliance,
To set these sad Anti-Church times at defiance:
You, John, recollect, being still to embark,
With no share in the firm but your title and _mark_;
Or even should you feel in your grandeur inclined
To call yourself Pope, why, I shouldnt much mind;
While _my_ church as usual holds fast by your Tuum,
And every one else's, to make it all Suum.

Thus allied, I've no doubt we shall nicely agree,
As no twins can be liker, in most points, than we;
Both, specimens choice of that mixt sort of beast,
(See Rev. xiii. I) a political priest:
Both mettlesome _chargers_, both brisk pamphleteers,
Ripe and ready for all that sets men by the ears;
And I, at least one, who would scorn to stick longer
By any given cause than I found it the stronger,
And who, smooth in my turnings, as if on a swivel,
When the tone ecclesiastic wont do, try the _civil_.

In short (not to bore you, even _jure divino_)
We've the same cause in common, John--all but the rhino;
And that vulgar surplus, whate'er it may be,
As you're not used to cash, John, you'd best leave to me.
And so, without form--as the postman wont tarry--
I'm, dear Jack of Tuain,
  Yours,
    EXETER HARRY.


[1] So spelled in those ancient versicles which John, we understand,
frequently chants:--
  "Had every one _Suum_,
  You wouldnt have _Tuum_,
  But I should have _Meum_,
  And sing _Te Deum_."






SONG OF OLD PUCK.


    "And those things do best please me,
    That befall preposterously."
    PUCK Junior, _Midsummer Night's Dream_.


Who wants old Puck? for here am I,
A mongrel imp, 'twixt earth and sky,
Ready alike to crawl or fly;
Now in the mud, now in the air,
And, so 'tis for mischief, reckless where.

As to my knowledge, there's no end to't,
For, where I haven't it, I pretend to't:
And, 'stead of taking a learned degree
At some dull university,
Puck found it handier to commence
With a certain share of impudence,
Which passes one off as learned and clever,
Beyond all other degrees whatever;
And enables a man of lively sconce
To be Master of _all_ the Arts at once.
No matter what the science may be--
Ethics, Physics, Theology,
Mathematics, Hydrostatics,
Aerostatics or Pneumatics--
Whatever it be, I take my luck,
'Tis all the same to ancient Puck;
Whose head's so full of all sorts of wares,
That a brother imp, old Smugden, swears
If I had but of _law_ a little smattering,
I'd then be _perfect_--which is flattering.

My skill as a linguist all must know
Who met me abroad some months ago;
(And heard me _abroad_ exceedingly,
In the moods and tenses of _parlez vous_)
When, as old Chambaud's shade stood mute,
I spoke such French to the Institute
As puzzled those learned Thebans much,
To know if 'twas Sanscrit or High Dutch,
And _might_ have past with the unobserving
As one of the unknown tongues of Irving.
As to my talent for ubiquity,
There's nothing like it in all antiquity.
Like Mungo (my peculiar care)
"I'm here, I'm dere, I'm ebery where."

If any one's wanted to take the chair
Upon any subject, any where,
Just look around, and--Puck is there!
When slaughter's at hand, your bird of prey
Is never known to be out of the way:
And wherever mischief's to be got,
There's Puck _instanter_, on the spot.

Only find me in negus and applause,
And I'm your man for _any_ cause.
If _wrong_ the cause, the more my delight;
But I dont object to it, even when _right_,
If I only can vex some old friend by't;
There's Durham, for instance;--to worry _him_
Fills up my cup of bliss to the brim!

(NOTE BY THE EDITOR.)

Those who are anxious to run a muck
Cant do better than join with Puck.
They'll find him _bon diable_--spite of his phiz--
And, in fact, his great ambition is,
While playing old Puck in first-rate style,
To be _thought_ Robin Good-fellow all the while.






POLICE REPORTS.

CASE OF IMPOSTURE.


Among other stray flashmen disposed of, this week,
  Was a youngster named Stanley, genteelly connected,
Who has lately been passing off coins as antique,
  Which have proved to be _sham_ ones, tho' long unsuspected.

The ancients, our readers need hardly be told,
  Had a coin they called "Talents," for wholesale demands;
And 'twas some of said coinage this youth was so bold
  As to fancy he'd got, God knows how, in his hands.

People took him, however, like fools, at his word;
  And these talents (all prized at his own valuation,)
Were bid for, with eagerness even more absurd
  Than has often distinguisht this great thinking nation.

Talk of wonders one now and then sees advertised,
  "Black swans"--"Queen Anne farthings"--or even "a child's caul"--
Much and justly as all these rare objects are prized,
  "Stanley's talents" outdid them--swans, farthings and all!

At length some mistrust of this coin got abroad;
  Even quondam believers began much to doubt of it;
Some rung it, some rubbed it, suspecting a fraud--
  And the hard rubs it got rather took the shine out of it.

Others, wishing to break the poor prodigy's fall,
  Said 'twas known well to all who had studied the matter,
That the Greeks had not only _great_ talents but _small_,
  And those found on the youngster were clearly _the latter_.

While others who viewed the grave farce with a grin--
  Seeing counterfeits pass thus for coinage so massy,
By way of a hint to the dolts taken in,
  Appropriately quoted Budaeus "de _Asse_."

In short, the whole sham by degrees was found out,
  And this coin which they chose by such fine names to call,
Proved a mere lackered article--showy, no doubt,
  But, ye gods! not the true Attic Talent at all.

As the impostor was still young enough to repent,
  And, besides, had some claims to a grandee connection,
Their Worships--considerate for once--only sent
  The young Thimblerig off to the House of Correction.






REFLECTIONS.

ADDRESSED TO THE AUTHOR OF THE ARTICLE OF THE CHURCH IN THE LAST NUMBER OF
_The Quarterly Review_.


I'm quite of your mind;--tho' these Pats cry aloud
  That they've got "too much Church," 'tis all nonsense and stuff;
For Church is like Love, of which Figaro vowed
  That even _too much_ of it's not quite enough.

Ay! dose them with parsons, 'twill cure all their ills;--
  Copy Morrison's mode when from pill-box undaunted he
Pours thro' the patient his black-coated pills,
  Nor cares what their quality, so there's but quantity.

I verily think 'twould be worth England's while
  To consider, for Paddy's own benefit, whether
'Twould not be as well to give up the green isle
  To the care, wear and tear of the Church altogether.

The Irish are well used to treatment so pleasant;
  The harlot Church gave them to Henry Plantagenet,[1]
And now if King William would make them a present
  To t'other chaste lady--ye Saints, just imagine it!

Chief Secs., Lord-Lieutenants, Commanders-in-chief,
  Might then all be culled from the episcopal benches;
While colonels in black would afford some relief
  From the hue that reminds one of the old scarlet wench's.

Think how fierce at a _charge_ (being practised therein)
  The Right Reverend Brigadier Phillpotts would slash on!
How General Blomfield, thro' thick and thro' thin,
  To the end of the chapter (or chapters) would dash on!

For in one point alone do the amply fed race
  Of bishops to beggars similitude bear--
That, set them on horseback, in full steeple chase,
  And they'll ride, if not pulled up in time--you know where.

But, bless you! in Ireland, that matters not much,
  Where affairs have for centuries gone the same way;
And a good stanch Conservative's system is such
  That he'd back even Beelzebub's long-founded sway.

I am therefore, dear _Quarterly_, quite of your mind;--
  Church, Church, in all shapes, into Erin let's pour:
And the more she rejecteth our medicine so kind.
  The more let's repeat it--"Black dose, as before."

Let Coercion, that peace-maker, go hand in hand
  With demure-eyed Conversion, fit sister and brother;
And, covering with prisons and churches the land,
  All that won't _go_ to _one_, we'll put _into_ the other.

For the sole, leading maxim of us who're inclined
  To rule over Ireland, not well but religiously,
Is to treat her like ladies who've just been confined
  (Or who _ought_ to be so), and to _church_ her prodigiously.


[1] Grant of Ireland to Henry II. by Pope Adrian.






NEW GRAND EXHIBITION OF MODELS OF THE TWO HOUSES OF PARLIAMENT.


Come, step in, gentlefolks, here ye may view
  An exact and natural representation
(Like Siburn's Model of Waterloo[1])
  Of the Lords and Commons of this here nation.

There they are--all cut out in cork--
  The "Collective Wisdom" wondrous to see;
My eyes! when all them heads are at work,
  What a vastly weighty consarn it must be.

As for the "wisdom,"--_that_ may come anon;
  Tho', to say truth, we sometimes see
(And I find the phenomenon no uncommon 'un)
  A man who's M.P. with a head that's M.T.

Our Lords are _rather_ too small, 'tis true;
  But they do well enough for Cabinet shelves;
And, besides,--_what's_ a man with creeturs to do
  That make such _werry_ small figures themselves?

There--dont touch those lords, my pretty dears--(_Aside_.)
  Curse the children!--this comes of reforming a nation:
Those meddling young brats have so damaged my peers,
  I must lay in more cork for a new creation.

Them yonder's our bishops--"to whom much is given,"
  And who're ready to take as much more as you please:
The seers of old time saw visions of heaven,
  But these holy seers see nothing but Sees.

Like old Atlas[2](the chap, in Cheapside, there below,)
  'Tis for so much _per cent_, they take heaven on their shoulders;
And joy 'tis to know that old High Church and Co.,
  Tho' not capital priests, are such capital-holders.

There's one on 'em, Phillpotts, who now is away,
  As we're having him filled with bumbustible stuff,
Small crackers and squibs, for a great gala-day,
  When we annually fire his Right Reverence off.

'Twould do your heart good, ma'am, then to be by,
  When, bursting with gunpowder, 'stead of with bile,
Crack, crack, goes the bishop, while dowagers cry,
  "How like the dear man, both in matter and style!"

Should you want a few Peers and M.P.s, to bestow,
  As presents to friends, we can recommend these:--
Our nobles are come down to nine-pence, you know,
  And we charge but a penny a piece for M.P.s.

Those of _bottle_-corks made take most with the trade,
  (At least 'mong such as my _Irish_ writ summons,)
Of old _whiskey_ corks our O'Connells are made,
  But those we make Shaws and Lefroys of, are _rum_ 'uns.
    So, step in, gentlefolks, etc.
        _Da Capo_.


[1] One of the most interesting and curious of all the exhibitions of the
day.

[2] The sign of the Insurance Office in Cheapside.






ANNOUNCEMENT OF A NEW GRAND ACCELERATION COMPANY
FOR THE PROMOTION OF THE SPEED OF LITERATURE.


Loud complaints being made in these quick-reading times,
Of too slack a supply both of prose works and rhymes,
A new Company, formed on the keep-moving plan,
First proposed by the great firm of Catch-'em-who-can,
Beg to say they've now ready, in full wind and speed,
Some fast-going authors, of quite a new breed--
Such as not he who _runs_ but who _gallops_ may read--
And who, if well curried and fed, they've no doubt,
Will beat even Bentley's swift stud out and out.

It is true in these days such a drug is renown,
We've "Immortals" as rife as M.P.s about town;
And not a Blue's rout but can offhand supply
Some invalid bard who's insured "not to die."
Still let England but once try _our_ authors, she'll find
How fast they'll leave even these Immortals behind;
And how truly the toils of Alcides were light,
Compared with _his_ toil who can read all they write.

In fact there's no saying, so gainful the trade,
How fast immortalities now may be made;
Since Helicon never will want an "Undying One,"
As long as the public continues a Buying One;
And the company hope yet to witness the hour.
When, by strongly applying the mare-motive[1] power,
A three-decker novel, midst oceans of praise,
May be written, launched, read and--forgot, in three days!

In addition to all this stupendous celerity,
Which--to the no small relief of posterity--
Pays off at sight the whole debit of fame,
Nor troubles futurity even with a name
(A project that wont as much tickle Tom Tegg as _us_,
Since 'twill rob _him_ of his second-priced Pegasus);
We, the Company--still more to show how immense
Is the power o'er the mind of pounds, shillings, and pence;
And that not even Phoebus himself, in our day,
Could get up a _lay_ without first an _out_-lay--
Beg to add, as our literature soon may compare,
In its quick make and vent, with our Birmingham ware,
And it doesnt at all matter in either of these lines,
How _sham_ is the article, so it but _shines_,--
We keep authors ready, all perched, pen in hand,
To write off, in any given style, at command.
No matter what bard, be he living or dead,
Ask a work from his pen, and 'tis done soon as said:
There being on the establishment six Walter Scotts,
One capital Wordsworth and Southeys in lots;--
Three choice Mrs. Nortons, all singing like syrens,
While most of our pallid young clerks are Lord Byrons.
Then we've ***s and ***s (for whom there's small call),
And ***s and ***s (for whom no call at all).
In short, whosoe'er the last "Lion" may be,
We've a Bottom who'll copy his _roar_[2] to a T,
And so well, that not one of the buyers who've got 'em
Can tell which is lion, and which only Bottom.

N. B.--The company, since they set up in this line,
Have moved their concern and are now at the sign
Of the Muse's Velocipede, _Fleet_ Street, where all
Who wish well to the scheme are invited to call.


[1] "'Tis money makes the mare to go."

[2]  "Bottom: Let me play the lion; I will roar you as 'twere any
nightingale."






SOME ACCOUNT OF THE LATE DINNER TO DAN.


From tongue to tongue the rumor flew;
All askt, aghast, "Is't true? is't true?"
  But none knew whether 'twas fact or fable:
And still the unholy rumor ran,
From Tory woman to Tory man,
  Tho' none to come at the truth was able--
Till, lo! at last, the fact came out,
The horrible fact, beyond all doubt,
  That Dan had dined at the Viceroy's table;
Had flesht his Popish knife and fork
In the heart of the Establisht mutton and pork!

Who can forget the deep sensation
That news produced in this orthodox nation?
Deans, rectors, curates, all agreed,
If Dan was allowed at the Castle to feed,
'Twas clearly _all up_ with the Protestant creed!
There hadnt indeed such an apparition
  Been heard of in Dublin since that day
When, during the first grand exhibition
  Of Don Giovanni, that naughty play,
There appeared, as if raised by necromancers,
An _extra_ devil among the dancers!
Yes--every one saw with fearful thrill
That a devil too much had joined the quadrille;
And sulphur was smelt and the lamps let fall
A grim, green light o'er the ghastly ball,
And the poor _sham_ devils didnt like it at all;
For they knew from whence the intruder had come,
Tho' he left, that night, his tail at home.

This fact, we see, is a parallel case
To the dinner that some weeks since took place.
With the difference slight of fiend and man,
  It shows what a nest of Popish sinners
That city must be, where the devil and Dan
  May thus drop in at quadrilles and dinners!

But mark the end of these foul proceedings,
These demon hops and Popish feedings.
Some comfort 'twill be--to those, at least,
  Who've studied this awful dinner question--
To know that Dan, on the night of that feast,
  Was seized with a dreadful indigestion;
That envoys were sent post-haste to his priest
To come and absolve the suffering sinner,
For eating so much at a heretic dinner;
And some good people were even afraid
That Peel's old confectioner--still at the trade--
Had poisoned the Papist with _orangeade_.






NEW HOSPITAL FOR SICK LITERATI.


With all humility we beg
To inform the public, that Tom Tegg--
Known for his spunky speculations
In buying up dead reputations,
And by a mode of galvanizing
Which, all must own, is quite surprising,
Making dead authors move again,
As tho' they still were living men;--
All this too managed, in a trice,
By those two magic words, "Half Price,"
Which brings the charm so quick about,
That worn-out poets, left without
A second _foot_ whereon to stand,
Are made to go at second _hand_;--
'Twill please the public, we repeat,
To learn that Tegg who works this feat,
And therefore knows what care it needs
To keep alive Fame's invalids,
Has oped an Hospital in town,
For cases of knockt-up renown--
Falls, fractures, dangerous Epic _fits_
(By some called _Cantoes_), stabs from wits;
And of all wounds for which they're nurst,
_Dead cuts_ from publishers, the worst;--
All these, and other such fatalities,
That happen to frail immortalities,
By Tegg are so expertly treated,
That oft-times, when the cure's completed,
The patient's made robust enough
To stand a few more rounds of _puff_,
Till like the ghosts of Dante's lay
He's puft into thin air away!
As titled poets (being phenomenons)
Dont like to mix with low and common 'uns,
Tegg's Hospital has separate wards,
Express for literary lords,
Where _prose_-peers, of immoderate length,
Are nurst, when they've outgrown their strength,
And poets, whom their friends despair of,
Are--put to bed and taken care of.

Tegg begs to contradict a story
Now current both with Whig and Tory,
That Doctor Warburton, M.P.,
Well known for his antipathy,
His deadly hate, good man, to all
The race of poets great and small--
So much, that he's been heard to own,
He would most willingly cut down
The holiest groves on Pindus' mount,
To turn the timber to account!--
The story actually goes, that he
Prescribes at Tegg's Infirmary;
And oft not only stints for spite
The patients in their copy-right,
But that, on being called in lately
To two sick poets suffering greatly,
This vaticidal Doctor sent them
So strong a dose of Jeremy Bentham,
That one of the poor bards but cried,
"Oh, Jerry, Jerry!" and then died;
While t'other, tho' less stuff was given,
Is on his road, 'tis feared, to heaven!

Of this event, howe'er unpleasant,
Tegg means to say no more at present,--
Intending shortly to prepare
A statement of the whole affair,
With full accounts, at the same time,
Of some late cases (prose and rhyme),
Subscribed with every author's name,
That's now on the Sick List of Fame.






RELIGION AND TRADE.


    "Sir Robert Peel believed it was necessary to originate all
    respecting religion and trade in a Committee of the House."
    --_Church Extension_, May 22, 1830.


Say, who was the wag, indecorously witty,
  Who first in a statute this libel conveyed;
And thus slyly referred to the selfsame committee,
  As matters congenial, Religion and Trade?

Oh surely, my Phillpotts, 'twas thou didst the deed;
  For none but thyself or some pluralist brother,
Accustomed to mix up the craft with the creed,
  Could bring such a pair thus to twin with each other.

And yet, when one thinks of times present and gone,
  One is forced to confess on maturer reflection
That 'tisn't in the eyes of committees alone
  That the shrine and the shop seem to have some connection.

Not to mention those monarchs of Asia's fair land,
  Whose civil list all is in "god-money" paid;
And where the whole people, by royal command,
  Buy their gods at the government mart, ready made;[1]--

There was also (as mentioned, in rhyme and in prose, is)
  Gold heaped throughout Egypt on every shrine,
To make rings for right reverend crocodiles' noses--
Just such as, my Phillpotts, would look well in thine.

But one needn't fly off in this erudite mood;
  And 'tis clear without going to regions so sunny
That priests love to do the _least_ possible good
  For the largest _most_ possible quantum of money.

"Of him," saith the text, "unto whom much is given,
  "Of him much, in turn, will be also required:"--
"By _me_," quoth the sleek and obese man of heaven--
  "Give as much as you will--more will still be desired."

More money! more churches!--oh Nimrod, hadst thou
  'Stead of _Tower_-extension, some shorter way gone--
Hadst thou known by what methods we mount to heaven _now_,
  And tried _Church_-extension, the feat had been done!


[1] The Birmans may not buy the sacred marble in mass but must purchase
figures of the deity already made.--_SYMES_.






MUSINGS.

SUGGESTED BY THE LATE PROMOTION OF MRS. NETHERCOAT.


    "The widow of Nethercoat is appointed jailer of Loughrea, in the room
    of her deceased husband."--_Limerick Chronicle_.


Whether as queens or subjects, in these days,
  Women seem formed to grace alike each station:--
As Captain Flaherty gallantly says,
  "You ladies, are the lords of the creation!"

Thus o'er my mind did prescient visions float
  Of all that matchless woman yet may be;
When hark! in rumors less and less remote,
  Came the glad news o'er Erin's ambient sea,
The important news--that Mrs. Nethercoat
  Had been appointed jailer of Loughrea;
Yes, mark it, History--Nethercoat is dead,
And Mrs. N. now rules his realm instead;
Hers the high task to wield the uplocking keys,
To rivet rogues and reign o'er Rapparees!

Thus, while your blusterers of the Tory school
Find Ireland's sanest sons so hard to rule,
One meek-eyed matron in Whig doctrines nurst
Is all that's askt to curb the maddest, worst!

Show me the man that dares with blushless brow
Prate about Erin's rage and riot now;
Now, when her temperance forms her sole excess;
  When long-loved whiskey, fading from her sight,
"Small by degrees and beautifully less,"
  Will soon like other _spirits_ vanish quite;
When of red coats the number's grown so small,
  That soon, to cheer the warlike parson's eyes,
No glimpse of scarlet will be seen at all,
  Save that which she of Babylon supplies;--
Or, at the most, a corporal's guard will be,
  Of Ireland's _red_ defence the sole remains;
While of its jails bright woman keeps the key,
  And captive Paddies languish in her chains!

Long may such lot be Erin's, long be mine!
Oh yes--if even this world, tho' bright it shine,
  In Wisdom's eyes a prison-house must be,
At least let woman's hand our fetters twine,
  And blithe I'll sing, more joyous than if free,
  The Nethercoats, the Nethercoats for me!






INTENDED TRIBUTE

TO THE AUTHOR OF AN ARTICLE IN THE LAST NUMBER OF
_The Quarterly Review_,
ENTITLED "ROMANISM IN IRELAND."


It glads us much to be able to say,
That a meeting is fixt for some early day,
Of all such dowagers--_he_ or _she_--
(No matter the sex, so they dowagers be,)
Whose opinions concerning Church and State
From about the time of the Curfew date--
Stanch sticklers still for days bygone,
And admiring _them_ for their rust alone--
To whom if we would a leader give,
Worthy their tastes conservative,
We need but some mummy-statesman raise,
Who was pickled and potted in Ptolemy's days;
For _that's_ the man, if waked from his shelf,
To conserve and swaddle this world like himself.
Such, we're happy to state, are the old _he_-dames
Who've met in committee and given their names
(In good hieroglyphics), with kind intent
To pay some handsome compliment
To their sister author, the nameless he,
Who wrote, in the last new _Quarterly_,
That charming assault upon Popery;
An article justly prized by them
As a perfect antediluvian gem--
The work, as Sir Sampson Legend would say,
Of some "fellow the Flood couldnt wash away."[1]

The fund being raised, there remained but to see
What the dowager-author's gift was to be.
And here, I must say, the Sisters Blue
Showed delicate taste and judgment too.
For finding the poor man suffering greatly
From the awful stuff he has thrown up lately--
So much so indeed to the alarm of all,
As to bring on a fit of what doctors call
The Antipapistico-monomania
(I'm sorry with such a long word to detain ye),
They've acted the part of a kind physician,
By suiting their gift to the patient's condition;
And as soon as 'tis ready for presentation,
We shall publish the facts for the gratification
Of this highly-favored and Protestant nation.

Meanwhile, to the great alarm of his neighbors,
He still continues his _Quarterly_ labors;
And often has strong No-Popery fits,
Which frighten his old nurse out of her wits.
Sometimes he screams, like Scrub in the play,[2]
"Thieves! Jesuits! Popery!" night and day;
Takes the Printer's Devil for Doctor Dens,
And shies at him heaps of High-church pens;[3]
Which the Devil (himself a touchy Dissenter)
Feels all in his hide, like arrows, enter.
'Stead of swallowing wholesome stuff from the druggist's,
He _will_ keep raving of "Irish Thuggists;"[4]
Tells us they all go murdering for fun
From rise of morn till set of sun,
Pop, pop, as fast as a minute-gun![5]
If askt, how comes it the gown and cassock are
Safe and fat, mid this general massacre--
How hap sit that Pat's own population
But swarms the more for this trucidation--
He refers you, for all such memoranda,
To the "_archives of the Propaganda_!"

This is all we've got, for the present, to say--
But shall take up the subject some future day.


[1] See Congreve's "Love for Love."

[2] "Beaux' Stratagem."

[3] "Pray, may we ask, has there been any rebellious movement of Popery in
Ireland, since the planting of the Ulster colonies, in which something of
the kind was not visible among the Presbyterians of the north."--
_Quarterly Review_.

[4] "Lord Lorton, for instance, who, for clearing his estate of a village
of Irish Thuggists," etc.--_Quarterly Review_.

[5] "Observe how murder after murder is committed like minute-guns."--
_Ibid_.






GRAND DINNER OF TYPE AND CO.

A POOR POET'S DREAM.[1]


As I sate in my study, lone and still,
Thinking of Sergeant Talfourd's Bill,
And the speech by Lawyer Sugden made,
In spirit congenial, for "the Trade,"
Sudden I sunk to sleep and lo!
  Upon Fancy's reinless nightmare flitting,
I found myself, in a second or so,
At the table of Messrs. Type and Co.
  With a goodly group of diners sitting;--
All in the printing and publishing line,
Drest, I thought, extremely fine,
And sipping like lords their rosy wine;
While I in a state near inanition
  With coat that hadn't much nap to spare
(Having just gone into its second edition),
  Was the only wretch of an author there.
But think, how great was my surprise,
When I saw, in casting round my eyes,
That the dishes, sent up by Type's she-cooks,
Bore all, in appearance, the shape of books;
Large folios--God knows where they got 'em,
In these _small_ times--at top and bottom;
And quartos (such as the Press provides
For no one to read them) down the sides.
Then flasht a horrible thought on my brain,
And I said to myself, "'Tis all too plain,
"Like those well known in school quotations,
"Who ate up for dinner their own relations,
"I see now, before me, smoking here,
"The bodies and bones of my brethren dear;--
"Bright sons of the lyric and epic Muse,
"All cut up in cutlets, or hasht in stews;
"Their _works_, a light thro' ages to go,--
"_Themselves_, eaten up by Type and Co.!"

While thus I moralized, on they went,
Finding the fare most excellent:
And all so kindly, brother to brother,
Helping the tidbits to each other:
"A slice of Southey let me send you"--
"This cut of Campbell I recommend you"--
"And here, my friends, is a treat indeed,
"The immortal Wordsworth fricasseed!"
Thus having, the cormorants, fed some time,
Upon joints of poetry--all of the prime--
With also (as Type in a whisper averred it)
"Cold prose on the sideboard, for such as preferred it"--
They rested awhile, to recruit their force,
Then pounced, like kites, on the second course,
Which was singing-birds merely--Moore and others--
Who all went the way of their larger brothers;
And, numerous now tho' such songsters be,
'Twas really quite distressing to see
A whole dishful of Toms--Moore, Dibdin, Bayly,--
Bolted by Type and Co. so gayly!

Nor was this the worst--I shudder to think
What a scene was disclosed when they came to drink.
The warriors of Odin, as every one knows,
Used to drink out of skulls of slaughtered foes:
And Type's old port, to my horror I found,
Was in skulls of bards sent merrily round.
And still as each well-filled cranium came,
A health was pledged to its owner's name;
While Type said slyly, midst general laughter,
"We eat them up first, then drink to them after."
There was _no_ standing this--incensed I broke
From my bonds of sleep, and indignant woke,
Exclaiming, "Oh shades of other times,
"Whose voices still sound, like deathless chimes,
"Could you e'er have foretold a day would be,
"When a dreamer of dreams should live to see
"A party of sleek and honest John Bulls
"Hobnobbing each other in poets' skulls!"


[1] Written during the late agitation of the question of Copyright.






CHURCH EXTENSION.

TO THE EDITOR OF THE MORNING CHRONICLE.


    Sir--A well-known classical traveller, while employed in exploring,
    some time since, the supposed site of the Temple of Diana of Ephesus,
    was so fortunate, in the course of his researches, as to light upon a
    very ancient bark manuscript, which has turned out, on examination,
    to be part of an old Ephesian newspaper;--a newspaper published, as
    you will see, so far back as the time when Demetrius, the great
    Shrine-Extender,[1] flourished.

    I am, Sir, yours, etc.

    EPHESIAN GAZETTE.


_Second edition_.

Important event for the rich and religious!
  Great Meeting of Silversmiths held in Queen Square;--
Church Extension, their object,--the excitement prodigious;--
  Demetrius, head man of the craft, takes the chair!

_Third edition_.

The Chairman still up, when our devil came away;
  Having prefaced his speech with the usual state prayer,
That the Three-headed Dian would kindly, this day,
  Take the Silversmiths' Company under her care.

Being askt by some low, unestablisht divines,
  "When your churches are up, where are flocks to be got?"
He manfully answered, "Let _us_ build the shrines,[2]
  "And we care not if flocks are found for them or not."

He then added--to show that the Silversmiths' Guild
  Were above all confined and intolerant views--
"Only _pay_ thro' the nose to the altars we build,
  "You may _pray_ thro' the nose to what altars you choose."

This tolerance, rare from a shrine-dealer's lip
  (Tho' a tolerance mixt with due taste for the till)--
So much charmed all the holders of scriptural scrip,
  That their shouts of "Hear!" "Hear!" are re-echoing still.

_Fourth edition_.

Great stir in the Shrine Market! altars to Phoebus
  Are going dog-cheap--may be had for a rebus.
Old Dian's, as usual, outsell all the rest;--
  But Venus's also are much in request.


[1] "For a certain man named Demetrius, a silversmith, which made shrines
for Diana, brought no small gain unto the craftsmen: whom he called
together with the workmen of like occupation, and said, Sirs, ye know that
by this craft we have our wealth[...to be completed...

[2] The "shrines" are supposed to have been small churches, or chapels,
adjoining to the great temples.






LATEST ACCOUNTS FROM OLYMPUS.


As news from Olympus has grown rather rare,
Since bards, in their cruises, have ceased to _touch_ there,
We extract for our readers the intelligence given,
In our latest accounts from that _ci-devant_ Heaven--
That realm of the By-gones, where still sit in state
Old god-heads and nod-heads now long out of date.

Jove himself, it appears, since his love-days are o'er,
Seems to find immortality rather a bore;
Tho' he still asks for news of earth's capers and crimes,
And reads daily his old fellow-Thunderer, _the Times_.
He and Vulcan, it seems, by their wives still hen-_peckt_ are,
And kept on a stinted allowance of nectar.

Old Phoebus, poor lad, has given up inspiration,
And packt off to earth on a _puff_ speculation.
The fact is, he found his old shrines had grown dim,
Since bards lookt to Bentley and Colburn, not him.
So he sold off his stud of ambrosia-fed nags.
Came incog. down to earth, and now writes for the _Mags_;
Taking care that his work not a gleam hath to linger in't,
From which men could guess that the god had a finger in't.

There are other small facts, well deserving attention,
Of which our Olympic despatches make mention.
Poor Bacchus is still very ill, they allege,
Having never recovered the Temperance Pledge.
"What, the Irish!" he cried--"those I lookt to the most!
"If they give up the _spirit_, I give up the ghost:"
While Momus, who used of the gods to make fun,
Is turned Socialist now and declares there are none!

But these changes, tho' curious, are all a mere farce
Compared to the new "_casus belli_" of Mars,
Who, for years, has been suffering the horrors of quiet,
Uncheered by one glimmer of bloodshed or riot!
In vain from the clouds his belligerent brow
Did he pop forth, in hopes that somewhere or somehow,
Like Pat at a fair, he might "coax up a row:"
But the joke wouldn't take--the whole world had got wiser;
Men liked not to take a Great Gun for adviser;
And, still less, to march in fine clothes to be shot,
Without very well knowing for whom or for what.
The French, who of slaughter had had their full swing,
Were content with a shot, now and then, at their King;
While, in England, good fighting's a pastime so hard to gain,
Nobody's left to fight _with_, but Lord Cardigan.

'Tis needless to say then how monstrously happy
Old Mars has been made by what's now on the _tapis_;
How much it delights him to see the French rally,
In Liberty's name, around Mehemet Ali;
Well knowing that Satan himself could not find
A confection of mischief much more to his mind
Than the old _Bonnet Rouge_ and the Bashaw combined.
Right well, too, he knows, that there ne'er were attackers,
Whatever their cause, that they didnt find backers;
While any slight care for Humanity's woes
May be soothed by that "_Art Diplomatique_," which shows
How to come in the most approved method to blows.

This is all for to-day--whether Mars is much vext
At his friend Thiers's exit, we'll know by our next.






THE TRIUMPHS OF FARCE.


Our earth, as it rolls thro' the regions of space,
  Wears always two faces, the dark and the sunny;
And poor human life runs the same sort of race,
  Being sad on one side--on the other side, funny.

Thus oft we, at eve, to the Haymarket hie,
  To weep o'er the woes of Macready;--but scarce
Hath the tear-drop of Tragedy past from the eye,
  When lo! we're all laughing in fits at the Farce.

And still let us laugh--preach the world as it may--
  Where the cream of the joke is, the swarm will soon follow;
Heroics are very grand things in their way,
  But the laugh at the long run will carry it hollow.

For instance, what sermon on human affairs
  Could equal the scene that took place t'other day
'Twixt Romeo and Louis Philippe, on the stairs--
  The Sublime and Ridiculous meeting half-way!

Yes, Jocus! gay god, whom the Gentiles supplied,
  And whose worship not even among Christians declines,
In our senate thou'st languisht since Sheridan died,
  But Sydney still keeps thee alive in our shrines.

Rare Sydney! thrice honored the stall where he sits,
  And be his every honor he deigneth to climb at!
Had England a hierarchy formed all of wits,
  Who but Sydney would England proclaim as its primate?

And long may he flourish, frank, merry and brave--
  A Horace to hear and a Paschal to read;
While he _laughs_, all is safe, but, when Sydney grows grave,
  We shall then think the Church is in danger _indeed_.

Meanwhile it much glads us to find he's preparing
  To teach _other_ bishops to "seek the right way;"[1]
And means shortly to treat the whole Bench to an airing,
  Just such as he gave to Charles James t'other day.

For our parts, gravity's good for the soul,
  Such a fancy have we for the side that there's fun on,
We'd rather with Sydney southwest take a "stroll,"
  Than _coach_ it north-east with his Lordship of Lunnun.


[1] "This stroll in the metropolis is extremely well contrived for your
Lordship's speech; but suppose, my dear Lord, that instead of going E. and
N. E. you had turned about," etc.--SYDNEY SMITH'S _Last Letter to the
Bishop of London_.






THOUGHTS ON PATRONS, PUFFS, AND OTHER MATTERS.

IN AN EPISTLE FROM THOMAS MOORE TO SAMUEL ROGERS.


What, _thou_, my friend! a man of rhymes,
  And, better still, a man of guineas,
To talk of "patrons," in these times,
  When authors thrive like spinning-jennies,
And Arkwright's twist and Bulwer's page
  Alike may laugh at patronage!

No, no--those times are past away,
  When, doomed in upper floors to star it.
The bard inscribed to lords his lay,--
  Himself, the while, my Lord Mountgarret.
No more he begs with air dependent.
His "little bark may sail attendant"
  Under some lordly skipper's steerage;
But launched triumphant in the Row,
Or taken by Murray's self in tow.
  Cuts both _Star Chamber_ and the peerage.

Patrons, indeed! when scarce a sail
Is whiskt from England by the gale.
But bears on board some authors, shipt
For foreign shores, all well equipt
With proper book-making machinery,
To sketch the morals, manners, scenery,
Of all such lands as they shall see,
Or _not_ see, as the case may be:--
It being enjoined on all who go
To study first Miss Martineau,
And learn from her the method true,[too.
To _do_ one's books--and readers,
For so this nymph of _nous_ and nerve
Teaches mankind "How to Observe;"
And, lest mankind at all should swerve,
Teaches them also "_What_ to Observe."

No, no, my friend--it cant be blinkt--
The Patron is a race extinct;
As dead as any Megatherion
That ever Buckland built a theory on.
Instead of bartering in this age
Our praise for pence and patronage,
We authors now more prosperous elves,
Have learned to patronize ourselves;
And since all-potent Puffing's made
The life of song, the soul of trade.
More frugal of our praises grown,
We puff no merits but our own.

Unlike those feeble gales of praise
Which critics blew in former days,
Our modern puffs are of a kind
That truly, really _raise the wind;_
And since they've fairly set in blowing,
We find them the best _trade_-winds going.
'Stead of frequenting paths so slippy
As her old haunts near Aganippe,
The Muse now taking to the till
Has opened shop on Ludgate Hill
(Far handier than the Hill of Pindus,
As seen from bard's back attic windows):
And swallowing there without cessation
Large draughts (_at sight_) of inspiration,
Touches the _notes_ for each new theme,
While still fresh "_change_ comes o'er her dream."

What Steam is on the deep--and more--
Is the vast power of Puff on shore;
Which jumps to glory's future tenses
Before the present even commences;
And makes "immortal" and "divine" of us
Before the world has read one line of us.
In old times, when the God of Song
Drove his own two-horse team along,
Carrying inside a bard or two,
Bookt for posterity "all thro';"--
Their luggage, a few close-packt rhymes,
(Like yours, my friend,) for after-times--
So slow the pull to Fame's abode,
That folks oft slept upon the road;--
And Homer's self, sometimes, they say,
Took to his night-cap on the way.
Ye Gods! how different is the story
With our new galloping sons of glory,
Who, scorning all such slack and slow time,
Dash to posterity in _no_ time!
Raise but one general blast of Puff
To start your author--that's enough.
In vain the critics set to watch him
Try at the starting post to catch him:
He's off--the puffers carry it hollow--
The _critics_, if they please, may follow.
Ere _they_'ve laid down their first positions,
He's fairly blown thro' six editions!
In vain doth Edinburgh dispense
Her blue and yellow pestilence
(That plague so awful in my time
To young and touchy sons of rhyme)--
The _Quarterly_, at three months' date,
To catch the Unread One, comes too late;
And nonsense, littered in a hurry,
Becomes "immortal," spite of Murray.
But bless me!--while I thus keep fooling,
I hear a voice cry, "Dinner's cooling."
That postman too (who, truth to tell,
'Mong men of letters bears the bell,)
Keeps ringing, ringing, so infernally
That I _must_ stop--
    Yours sempiternally.






THOUGHTS ON MISCHIEF.

BY LORD STANLEY.

(HIS FIRST ATTEMPT IN VERSE.)


    "Evil, be thou my good."
    --MILTON.


How various are the inspirations
Of different men in different nations!
As genius prompts to good or evil,
Some call the Muse, some raise the devil.
Old Socrates, that pink of sages,
Kept a pet demon on board wages
To go about with him incog.,
And sometimes give his wits a jog.
So Lyndhurst, in _our_ day, we know,
Keeps fresh relays of imps below,
To forward from that nameless spot;
His inspirations, hot and hot.

But, neat as are old Lyndhurst's doings--
Beyond even Hecate's "hell-broth" brewings--
Had I, Lord Stanley, but my will,
I'd show you mischief prettier still;
Mischief, combining boyhood's tricks
With age's sourest politics;
The urchin's freaks, the veteran's gall,
Both duly mixt, and matchless all;
A compound naught in history reaches
But Machiavel, when first in breeches!

Yes, Mischief, Goddess multiform,
Whene'er thou, witch-like, ridest the storm,
Let Stanley ride cockhorse behind thee--
No livelier lackey could they find thee.
And, Goddess, as I'm well aware,
So mischief's _done_, you care not _where_,
I own, 'twill most _my_ fancy tickle
In Paddyland to play the Pickle;
Having got credit for inventing
A new, brisk method of tormenting--
A way they call the Stanley fashion,
Which puts all Ireland in a passion;
So neat it hits the mixture due
Of injury and insult too;
So legibly it bears upon't
The stamp of Stanley's brazen front.

Ireland, we're told, means the land of _Ire_;
And _why_ she's so, none need inquire,
Who sees her millions, martial, manly,
Spat upon thus by me, Lord Stanley.
Already in the breeze I scent
The whiff of coming devilment;
Of strife, to me more stirring far
Than the Opium or the Sulphur war,
Or any such drug ferments are.
Yes--sweeter to this Tory soul
Than all such pests, from pole to pole,
Is the rich, "sweltered venom" got
By stirring Ireland's "charmed pot;"
And thanks to practice on that land
I stir it with a master-hand.

Again thou'lt see, when forth have gone
The War-Church-cry, "On, Stanley, on!"
How Caravats and Shanavests
Shall swarm from out their mountain nests,
With all their merry moonlight brothers,
To whom the Church (_step_-dame to others)
Hath been the best of nursing mothers.
Again o'er Erin's rich domain
Shall Rockites and right reverends reign;
And both, exempt from vulgar toil,
Between them share that titheful soil;
Puzzling ambition _which_ to climb at,
The post of Captain, or of Primate.

And so, long life to Church and Co.--
Hurrah for mischief!--here we go.






EPISTLE FROM CAPTAIN ROCK TO LORD LYNDHURST.


Dear Lyndhurst,--you'll pardon my making thus free,--
But form is all fudge 'twixt such "comrogues" as we,
Who, whate'er the smooth views we, in public, may drive at,
Have both the same praiseworthy object, in private--
Namely, never to let the old regions of riot,
Where Rock hath long reigned, have one instant of quiet,
But keep Ireland still in that liquid we've taught her
To love more than meat, drink, or clothing--_hot water_.

All the difference betwixt you and me, as I take it,
Is simply, that _you_ make the law and _I_ break it;
And never, of big-wigs and small, were there two
Played so well into each other's hands as we do;
Insomuch, that the laws you and yours manufacture,
Seem all made express for the Rock-boys to fracture.
Not Birmingham's self--to her shame be it spoken--
E'er made things more neatly contrived to be broken;
And hence, I confess, in this island religious,
The breakage of laws--and of heads _is_ prodigious.

And long may it thrive, my Ex-Bigwig, say I,--
Tho', of late, much I feared all our fun was gone by;
As, except when some tithe-hunting parson showed sport,
Some rector--a cool hand at pistols and port,
Who "keeps dry" his _powder_, but never _himself_--
One who, leaving his Bible to rust on the shelf,
Sends his pious texts home, in the shape of ball-cartridges,
Shooting his "dearly beloved," like partridges;
Except when some hero of this sort turned out,
Or, the Exchequer sent, flaming, its tithe-writs[1] about--
A contrivance more neat, I may say, without flattery,
Than e'er yet was thought of for bloodshed and battery;
So neat, that even _I_ might be proud, I allow,
To have bit off so rich a receipt for a _row_;--
Except for such rigs turning up, now and then,
I was actually growing the dullest of men;
And, had this blank fit been allowed to increase,
Might have snored myself down to a Justice of Peace.
Like you, Reformation in Church and in State
Is the thing of all things I most cordially hate.
If once these curst Ministers do as they like,
All's o'er, my good Lord, with your wig and my pike,
And one may be hung up on t'other, henceforth,
Just to show what _such_ Captains and Chancellors were worth.

But we must not despair--even already Hope sees
You're about, my bold Baron, to kick up a breeze
Of the true baffling sort, such as suits me and you,
Who have boxt the whole compass of party right thro',
And care not one farthing, as all the world knows,
So we _but_ raise the wind, from what quarter it blows.
Forgive me, dear Lord, that thus rudely I dare
My own small resources with thine to compare:
Not even Jerry Diddler, in "raising the wind," durst
Complete, for one instant, with thee, my dear Lyndhurst.

But, hark, there's a shot!--some parsonic practitioner?
No--merely a bran-new Rebellion Commissioner;
The Courts having now, with true law erudition,
Put even Rebellion itself "in commission."
As seldom, in _this_ way, I'm any man's debtor,
I'll just _pay my shot_ and then fold up this letter.
In the mean time, hurrah for the Tories and Rocks!
Hurrah for the parsons who fleece well their flocks!
Hurrah for all mischief in all ranks and spheres,
And, above all, hurrah for that dear House of Peers!


[1] Exchequer tithe processes, served under a commission of
rebellion.--_Chronicle_.






CAPTAIN ROCK IN LONDON.

LETTER FROM THE CAPTAIN TO TERRY ALT, ESQ.[1]


Here I am, at headquarters, dear Terry, once more,
Deep in Tory designs, as I've oft been before:
For, bless them! if 'twasn't for this wrong-headed crew,
You and I, Terry Alt, would scarce know what to do;
So ready they're always, when dull we are growing,
To set our old concert of discord a-going,
While Lyndhurst's the lad, with his Tory-Whig face,
To play in such concert the true _double-base_.
I had feared this old prop of my realm was beginning
To tire of his course of political sinning,
And, like Mother Cole, when her heyday was past,
Meant by way of a change to try virtue at last.
But I wronged the old boy, who as staunchly derides
All reform in himself as in most things besides;
And, by using _two_ faces thro' life, all allow,
Has acquired face sufficient for _any_-thing now.

In short, he's all right; and, if mankind's old foe,
My "Lord Harry" himself--who's the leader, we know,
Of another red-hot Opposition below--
If that "Lord," in his well-known discernment, but spares
Me and Lyndhurst, to look after Ireland's affairs,
We shall soon such a region of devilment make it,
That Old Nick himself for his own may mistake it.
Even already--long life to such Bigwigs, say I,
For, as long as they flourish, we Rocks cannot die--

He has served our right riotous cause by a speech
Whose perfection of mischief he only could reach;
As it shows off both _his_ and _my_ merits alike,
Both the swell of the wig and the point of the pike;
Mixes up, with a skill which one cant but admire,
The lawyer's cool craft with the incendiary's fire,
And enlists, in the gravest, most plausible manner,
Seven millions of souls under Rockery's banner!
Oh Terry, my man, let this speech _never_ die;
Thro' the regions of Rockland, like flame, let it fly;
Let each syllable dark the Law-Oracle uttered
By all Tipperary's wild echoes be muttered.
Till naught shall be heard, over hill, dale or flood,
But "_You're aliens in language, in creed and in blood;_"
While voices, from sweet Connemara afar,
Shall answer, like true _Irish_ echoes, "We are!"
And, tho' false be the cry, and the sense must abhor it,
Still the echoes may quote _Law_ authority for it,
And naught Lyndhurst cares for my spread of dominion
So he, in the end, touches cash "for the _opinion_."

But I've no time for more, my dear Terry, just now,
Being busy in helping these Lords thro' their __row_.
They're bad hands at mob-work, but once they begin,
They'll have plenty of practice to break them well in.

[1] The subordinate officer or lieutenant of Captain Rock.








POLITICAL AND SATIRICAL POEMS.






LINES ON THE DEATH OF MR. PERCEVAL.


In the dirge we sung o'er him no censure was heard,
  Unembittered and free did the tear-drop descend;
We forgot, in that hour, how the statesman had erred,
  And wept for the husband, the father and friend.

Oh! proud was the meed his integrity won,
  And generous indeed were the tears that we shed,
When in grief we forgot all the ill he had done,
  And tho' wronged by him living, bewailed him, when dead.

Even now if one harsher emotion intrude,
  'Tis to wish he had chosen some lowlier state,
Had known what he was--and, content to be _good_,
  Had ne'er for our ruin aspired to be _great_.

So, left thro' their own little orbit to move,
  His years might have rolled inoffensive away;
His children might still have been blest with his love,
  And England would ne'er have been curst with his sway.






TO THE EDITOR OF "THE MORNING CHRONICLE."


    _Sir_,--In order to explain the following Fragment, it is
    necessary to refer your readers to a late florid description of the
    Pavilion at Brighton, in the apartments of which, we are told, "FUM,
    _The Chinese Bird of Royalty_," is a principal ornament.
      I am, Sir, yours, etc.
        MUM.


FUM AND HUM, THE TWO BIRDS OF ROYALTY.

One day the Chinese Bird of Royalty, FUM,
Thus accosted our own Bird of Royalty, HUM,
In that Palace or China-shop (Brighton, which is it?)
Where FUM had just come to pay HUM a short visit.--
Near akin are these Birds, tho' they differ in nation
(The breed of the HUMS is as old as creation);
Both, full-crawed Legitimates--both, birds of prey,
Both, cackling and ravenous creatures, half way
'Twixt the goose and the vulture, like Lord Castlereagh.
While FUM deals in Mandarins Bonzes, Bohea,
Peers, Bishops and Punch, HUM.--are sacred to thee
So congenial their tastes, that, when FUM first did light on
The floor of that grand China-warehouse at Brighton,
The lanterns and dragons and things round the dome
Where so like what he left, "Gad," says FUM, "I'm at home,"--
And when, turning, he saw Bishop L--GE, "Zooks, it is."
Quoth the Bird, "Yes--I know him--a Bonze, by his phiz-
"And that jolly old idol he kneels to so low
"Can be none but our round-about god-head, fat Fo!"
It chanced at this moment, the Episcopal Prig
Was imploring the Prince to dispense with his wig,[1]
Which the Bird, overhearing, flew high o'er his head,
And some TOBIT-like marks of his patronage shed,
Which so dimmed the poor Dandy's idolatrous eye,
That, while FUM cried "Oh Fo!" all the court cried "Oh fie!"

But a truce to digression;--these Birds of a feather
Thus talkt, t'other night, on State matters together;
(The PRINCE just in bed, or about to depart for't,
His legs full of gout, and his arms full of HARTFORD,)
"I say, HUM," says FUM--FUM, of course, spoke Chinese,
But, bless you! that's nothing--at Brighton one sees
Foreign lingoes and Bishops _translated_ with ease--
"I say, HUM, how fares it with Royalty now?
"Is it _up_? is it _prime_? is it _spooney_-or how?"
(The Bird had just taken a flash-man's degree
Under BARRYMORE, YARMOUTH, and young Master L--E,)
"As for us in Pekin"--here, a devil of a din
From the bed-chamber came, where that long Mandarin,
Castlereagh (whom FUM calls the _Confucius_ of Prose),
Was rehearsing a speech upon Europe's repose
To the deep, double bass of the fat Idol's nose.

(_Nota bene_--his Lordship and LIVERPOOL come,
In collateral lines, from the old Mother HUM,
CASTLEREAGH a HUM-bug--LIVERPOOL a HUM-drum,)
The Speech being finisht, out rusht CASTLEREAGH.
Saddled HUM in a hurry, and, whip, spur, away!
Thro' the regions of air, like a Snip on his hobby,
Ne'er paused till he lighted in St. Stephen's lobby.


[1] In consequence of an old promise, that he should be allowed to wear
his own hair, whenever he might be elevated to a Bishopric by his Royal
Highness.






LINES ON THE DEATH OF SHERIDAN.


    _principibus placuisse viris_!
    --HORAT.


Yes, grief will have way--but the fast falling tear
  Shall be mingled with deep execrations on those
Who could bask in that Spirit's meridian career.
  And yet leave it thus lonely and dark at its close:--

Whose vanity flew round him, only while fed
  By the odor his fame in its summer-time gave;--
Whose vanity now, with quick scent for the dead,
  Like the Ghoul of the East, comes to feed at his grave.

Oh! it sickens the heart to see bosoms so hollow,
  And spirits so mean in the great and high-born;
To think what a long line of titles may follow
  The relics of him who died--friendless and lorn!

How proud they can press to the funeral array
  Of one whom they shunned in his sickness and sorrow:--
How bailiffs may seize his last blanket to-day,
  Whose palls shall be held up by nobles to-morrow!

And Thou too whose life, a sick epicure's dream,
  Incoherent and gross, even grosser had past,
Were it not for that cordial and soul-giving beam
  Which his friendship and wit o'er thy nothingness cast:--

No! not for the wealth of the land that supplies thee
  With millions to heap upon Foppery's shrine;--
No! not for the riches of all who despise thee,
  Tho' this would make Europe's whole opulence mine;--

Would I suffer what--even in the heart that thou hast--
  All mean as it is--must have consciously burned.
When the pittance, which shame had wrung from thee at last,
  And which found all his wants at an end, was returned![1]

"Was this then the fate,"--future ages will say,
  When _some_ names shall live but in history's curse;
When Truth will be heard, and these Lords of a day
  Be forgotten as fools or remembered as worse;--

"Was this then the fate of that high-gifted man,
  "The pride of the palace, the bower and the hall,
"The orator,--dramatist,--minstrel,--who ran
  "Thro' each mode of the lyre and was master of all;--

"Whose mind was an essence compounded with art
  "From the finest and best of all other men's powers;-
"Who ruled, like a wizard, the world of the heart,
  "And could call up its sunshine or bring down its showers;--

"Whose humor, as gay as the firefly's light,
  "Played round every subject and shone as it played;--
"Whose wit in the combat, as gentle as bright,
  "Ne'er carried a heart-stain away on its blade;--

"Whose eloquence--brightening whatever it tried,
  "Whether reason or fancy, the gay or the grave,--
"Was as rapid, as deep and as brilliant a tide,
  "As ever bore Freedom aloft on its wave!"

Yes--such was the man and so wretched his fate;--
  And thus, sooner or later, shall all have to grieve,
Who waste their morn's dew in the beams of the Great,
 And expect 'twill return to refresh them at eve.

In the woods of the North there are insects that prey
  On the brain of the elk till his very last sigh;[2]
Oh, Genius! thy patrons, more cruel than they,
  First feed on thy brains and then leave thee to die!


[1] The sum was two hundred pounds--offered when Sheridan could no longer
take any sustenance, and declined, for him, by his friends.

[2] Naturalists have observed that, upon dissecting an elk, there was
found in its head some large flies, with its brain almost eaten away by
them,--_History of Poland_.






EPISTLE FROM TOM CRIB TO BIG BEN.[1]

CONCERNING SOME FOUL PLAY IN A LATE TRANSACTION.[2]


    _"Ahi, mio Ben!"_
    --METASTASIO.[3]


What! BEN, my old hero, is this your renown?
Is _this_ the new _go_?--kick a man when he's down!
When the foe has knockt under, to tread on him then--
By the fist of my father, I blush for thee, BEN!
"Foul! foul!" all the lads of the Fancy exclaim--
CHARLEY SHOCK is electrified--BELCHER spits flame--
And MOLYNEUX--ay, even BLACKY[4] cries "shame!"

Time was, when JOHN BULL little difference spied
'Twixt the foe at his feet and the friend at his side:
When he found (such his humor in fighting and eating)
His foe, like his beef-steak, the sweeter for beating.
But this comes, Master BEN, of your curst foreign notions,
Your trinkets, wigs, thingumbobs, gold lace and lotions;
Your Noyaus, Curacoas, and the devil knows what--
(One swig of _Blue Ruin_[5] is worth the whole lot!)

Your great and small _crosses_--my eyes, what a brood!
(A _cross_-buttock from _me_ would do some of them good!)
Which have spoilt you, till hardly a drop, my old porpoise,
Of pure English _claret_ is left in your _corpus_;
And (as JIM says) the only one trick, good or bad,
Of the Fancy you're up to, is _fibbing_, my lad.
Hence it comes,--BOXIANA, disgrace to thy page!--
Having floored, by good luck, the first _swell_ of the age,
Having conquered the _prime one_, that _milled_ us all round,
You kickt him, old BEN, as he gaspt on the ground!
Ay--just at the time to show spunk, if you'd got any--
Kickt him and jawed him and _lagged_[6] him to Botany!
Oh, shade of the _Cheesemonger_![7] you, who, alas!
_Doubled up_ by the dozen those Moun-seers in brass,
On that great day of _milling_, when blood lay in lakes,
When Kings held the bottle, and Europe the stakes,
Look down upon BEN--see him, _dung-hill_ all o'er,
Insult the fallen foe that can harm him no more!
Out, cowardly _spooney_!--again and again,
By the fist of my father, I blush for thee, BEN.
To _show the white feather_ is many men's doom,
But, what of _one_ feather?--BEN shows a _whole Plume_.


[1] A nickname given, at this time, to the Prince Regent.

[2] Written soon after Bonaparte's transportation to St. Helena.

[3] Tom, I suppose, was "assisted" to this Motto by Mr. Jackson, who, it
is well known, keeps the most learned company going.

[4] Names and nicknames of celebrated pugilists at that time.

[5] Gin.

[6] Transported.

[7] A Life-Guardsman, one of _the Fancy_ who distinguished himself
and was killed in the memorable _set-to_ at Waterloo.






FABLES FOR THE HOLY ALLIANCE.


    _tu Regibus alas eripe_
    VERGIL, _Georg. lib_. iv.


    --Clip the wings Of these high-flying arbitrary Kings.
    DRYDEN'S _Translation_.




DEDICATION.

TO LORD BYRON.

Dear Lord Byron,--Though this Volume should possess no other merit in your
eyes, than that of reminding you of the short time we passed together at
Venice, when some of the trifles which it contains were written, you will,
I am sure, receive the dedication of it with pleasure, and believe that I
am,

My dear Lord,

Ever faithfully yours,

T. B.




PREFACE.


Though it was the wish of the Members of the Poco-curante Society (who
have lately done me the honor of electing me their Secretary) that I
should prefix my name to the following Miscellany, it is but fair to them
and to myself to state, that, except in the "painful pre-eminence" of
being employed to transcribe their lucubrations, my claim to such a
distinction in the title-page is not greater than that of any other
gentleman, who has contributed his share to the contents of the volume.

I had originally intended to take this opportunity of giving some account
of the origin and objects of our Institution, the names and characters of
the different members, etc.--but as I am at present preparing for the
press the First Volume of the "Transactions of the Pococurante Society," I
shall reserve for that occasion all further details upon the subject, and
content myself here with referring, for a general insight into our tenets,
to a Song which will be found at the end of this work and which is sung to
us on the first day of every month, by one of our oldest members, to the
tune of (as far as I can recollect, being no musician,) either "Nancy
Dawson" or "He stole away the Bacon."

It may be as well also to state for the information of those critics who
attack with the hope of being answered, and of being thereby brought into
notice, that it is the rule of this Society to return no other answer to
such assailants, than is contained in the three words "_non curat
Hippoclides_" (meaning, in English, "Hippoclides does not care a fig,")
which were spoken two thousand years ago by the first founder of Poco-
curantism, and have ever since been adopted as the leading _dictum_ of the
sect.

THOMAS BROWN.






FABLES FOR THE HOLY ALLIANCE.




FABLE I.

THE DISSOLUTION OF THE HOLY ALLIANCE.

A DREAM.


I've had a dream that bodes no good
Unto the Holy Brotherhood.
I may be wrong, but I confess--
  As far as it is right or lawful
For one, no conjurer, to guess--
  It seems to me extremely awful.

Methought, upon the Neva's flood
A beautiful Ice Palace stood,
A dome of frost-work, on the plan
Of that once built by Empress Anne,[1]
Which shone by moonlight--as the tale is--
Like an Aurora Borealis.

In this said Palace, furnisht all
  And lighted as the best on land are,
I dreamt there was a splendid Ball,
  Given by the Emperor Alexander,
To entertain with all due zeal,
  Those holy gentlemen, who've shown a
Regard so kind for Europe's weal,
  At Troppau, Laybach and Verona.

The thought was happy--and designed
To hint how thus the human Mind
May, like the stream imprisoned there,
Be checkt and chilled, till it can bear
The heaviest Kings, that ode or sonnet
E'er yet be-praised, to dance upon it.
And all were pleased and cold and stately,
  Shivering in grand illumination--
Admired the superstructure greatly,
  Nor gave one thought to the foundation.
Much too the Tsar himself exulted,
  To all plebeian fears a stranger,
For, Madame Krudener, when consulted,
  Had pledged her word there was no danger
So, on he capered, fearless quite,
  Thinking himself extremely clever,
And waltzed away with all his might,
  As if the Frost would last forever.

Just fancy how a bard like me,
  Who reverence monarchs, must have trembled
To see that goodly company,
  At such a ticklish sport assembled.

Nor were the fears, that thus astounded
My loyal soul, at all unfounded--
For, lo! ere long, those walls so massy
  Were seized with an ill-omened dripping,
And o'er the floors, now growing glassy,
  Their Holinesses took to slipping.
The Tsar, half thro' a Polonaise,
  Could scarce get on for downright stumbling;
And Prussia, tho' to slippery ways
  Well used, was cursedly near tumbling.

Yet still 'twas, _who_ could stamp the floor most,
Russia and Austria 'mong the foremost.--
And now, to an Italian air,
  This precious brace would, hand in hand, go;
Now--while old Louis, from his chair,
Intreated them his toes to spare--
  Called loudly out for a Fandango.

And a Fandango, 'faith, they had,
At which they all set to, like mad!
Never were Kings (tho' small the expense is
Of wit among their Excellencies)
So out of all their princely senses,
But ah! that dance--that Spanish dance--
  Scarce was the luckless strain begun,
When, glaring red, as 'twere a glance
  Shot from an angry Southern sun,
A light thro' all the chambers flamed,
  Astonishing old Father Frost,
Who, bursting into tears, exclaimed,
  "A thaw, by Jove--we're lost, we're lost!
"Run, France--a second _Water_loo
"Is come to drown you-_sauve qui peut_!"

Why, why will monarchs caper so
  In palaces without foundations?--
Instantly all was in a flow,
  Crowns, fiddles, sceptres, decorations--
Those Royal Arms, that lookt so nice,
Cut out in the resplendent ice--
Those Eagles, handsomely provided
  With double heads for double dealings--
How fast the globes and sceptres glided
  Out of their claws on all the ceilings!
Proud Prussia's double bird of prey
Tame as a spatch cock, slunk away;
While--just like France herself, when she
  Proclaims how great her naval skill is--
Poor Louis's drowning fleurs-de-lys
  Imagined themselves _water_-lilies.

And not alone rooms, ceilings, shelves,
  But--still more fatal execution--
The Great Legitimates themselves
  Seemed in a state of dissolution.
The indignant Tsar--when just about
  To issue a sublime Ukase,
"Whereas all light must be kept out"--
  Dissolved to nothing in its blaze.
Next Prussia took his turn to melt,
And, while his lips illustrious felt
The influence of this southern air,
  Some word, like "Constitution"--long
Congealed in frosty silence there--
  Came slowly thawing from his tongue.
While Louis, lapsing by degrees,
  And sighing out a faint adieu
To truffles, salmis, toasted cheese
  And smoking _fondus_, quickly grew,
  Himself, into a _fondu_ too;--
Or like that goodly King they make
Of sugar for a Twelfth-night cake,
When, in some urchin's mouth, alas!
It melts into a shapeless mass!

In short, I scarce could count a minute,
Ere the bright dome and all within it,
Kings, Fiddlers, Emperors, all were gone--
  And nothing now was seen or heard
But the bright river, rushing on,
  Happy as an enfranchised bird,
And prouder of that natural ray,
Shining along its chainless way--
More proudly happy thus to glide
  In simple grandeur to the sea,
Than when, in sparkling fetters tied,
'Twas deckt with all that kingly pride
  Could bring to light its slavery!

Such is my dream--and, I confess,
I tremble at its awfulness.
That Spanish Dance--that southern beam--
But I say nothing--there's my dream--
And Madame Krdener, the she-prophet,
May make just what she pleases of it.


[1] "It is well-known that the Empress Anne built a palace of ice on the
Neva, in 1740, which was fifty-two feet in length, and when illuminated
had a surprising effect."--PINKERTON.






FABLE II.

THE LOOKING-GLASSES.


PROEM.

Where Kings have been by mob-elections
  Raised to the throne, 'tis strange to see
What different and what odd perfections
  Men have required in Royalty.
Some, liking monarchs large and plumpy,
  Have chosen their Sovereigns by the weight;--
Some wisht them tall, some thought your Dumpy,
  Dutch-built, the true Legitimate.[1]
The Easterns in a Prince, 'tis said,
Prefer what's called a jolterhead:[2]
The Egyptians weren't at all partic'lar,
  So that their Kings had _not_ red hair--
_This_ fault not even the greatest stickler
  For the blood-royal well could bear.

A thousand more such illustrations
Might be adduced from various nations.
But, 'mong the many tales they tell us,
  Touching the acquired or natural right
Which some men have to rule their fellows,
  There's one which I shall here recite:--

FABLE.

There was a land--to _name_ the place
  Is neither now my wish nor duty--
Where reigned a certain Royal race,
  By right of their superior beauty.

What was the cut legitimate
  Of these great persons' chins and noses,
By right of which they ruled the state,
  No history I have seen discloses.

But so it was--a settled case--
  Some Act of Parliament, past snugly,
Had voted _them_ a beauteous race,
  And all their faithful subjects ugly.

As rank indeed stood high or low,
  Some change it made in visual organs;
Your Peers were decent--Knights, so so--
  But all your _common_ people, gorgons!

Of course, if any knave but hinted
  That the King's nose was turned awry,
Or that the Queen (God bless her!) squinted--
  The judges doomed that knave to die.

But rarely things like this occurred,
  The people to their King were duteous,
And took it, on his Royal word,
  That they were frights and He was beauteous.

The cause whereof, among all classes,
  Was simply this--these island elves
Had never yet seen looking-glasses,
  And therefore did not _know themselves_.

Sometimes indeed their neighbors' faces
  Might strike them as more full of reason,
More fresh than those in certain places--
  But, Lord, the very thought was treason!

Besides, howe'er we love our neighbor,
  And take his face's part, 'tis known
We ne'er so much in earnest labor,
  As when the face attackt's our own.

So on they went--the crowd believing--
  (As crowds well governed always do)
Their rulers, too, themselves deceiving--
  So old the joke, they thought 'twas true.

But jokes, we know, if they too far go,
  Must have an end--and so, one day,
Upon that coast there was a cargo
  Of looking-glasses cast away.

'Twas said, some Radicals, somewhere,
  Had laid their wicked heads together,
And forced that ship to founder there,--
  While some believe it was the weather.

However this might be, the freight
  Was landed without fees or duties;
And from that hour historians date
  The downfall of the Race of Beauties.

The looking-glasses got about,
  And grew so common thro' the land,
That scarce a tinker could walk out,
  Without a mirror in his hand.

Comparing faces, morning, noon,
  And night, their constant occupation--
By dint of looking-glasses, soon,
  They grew a most reflecting nation.

In vain the Court, aware of errors
  In all the old, establisht mazards,
Prohibited the use of mirrors
  And tried to break them at all hazards:--

In vain--their laws might just as well
  Have been waste paper on the shelves;
That fatal freight had broke the spell;
  People had lookt--and knew themselves.

If chance a Duke, of birth sublime,
  Presumed upon his ancient face,
(Some calf-head, ugly from all time,)
  They popt a mirror to his Grace;--

Just hinting, by that gentle sign,
  How little Nature holds it true,
That what is called an ancient line,
  Must be the line of Beauty too.

From Dukes' they past to regal phizzes,
  Compared them proudly with their own,
And cried. "How _could_ such monstrous quizzes
  "In Beauty's name usurp the throne!"--

They then wrote essays, pamphlets, books,
  Upon Cosmetical Oeconomy,
Which made the King try various looks,
  But none improved his physiognomy.

And satires at the Court were levelled,
  And small lampoons, so full of slynesses,
That soon, in short, they quite bedeviled
  Their Majesties and Royal Highnesses.

At length--but here I drop the veil,
  To spare some royal folks' sensations;--
Besides, what followed is the tale
  Of all such late-enlightened nations;

Of all to whom old Time discloses
  A truth they should have sooner known--
That kings have neither rights nor noses
  A whit diviner than their own.


[1] The Goths had a law to choose always a short, thick man for their
King.--Munster, "_Cosmog." lib_. iii. p. 164.

[2] "In a Prince a jolter-head is invaluable."--_Oriental Field Sports_.






FABLE III.

THE TORCH OF LIBERTY.


I saw it all in Fancy's glass--
  Herself, the fair, the wild magician,
Who bade this splendid day-dream pass,
  And named each gliding apparition.

'Twas like a torch-race--such as they
  Of Greece performed, in ages gone,
When the fleet youths, in long array,
  Past the bright torch triumphant on.

I saw the expectant nations stand,
  To catch the coming flame in turn;--
I saw, from ready hand to hand,
  The clear tho' struggling glory burn.

And oh! their joy, as it came near,
  'Twas in itself a joy to see;--
While Fancy whispered in my ear.
  "That torch they pass is Liberty!"

And each, as she received the flame,
  Lighted her altar with its ray;
Then, smiling, to the next who came,
  Speeded it on its sparkling way.

From ALBION first, whose ancient shrine
Was furnisht with the fire already,
COLUMBIA caught the boon divine,
  And lit a flame, like ALBION'S, steady.

The splendid gift then GALLIA took,
  And, like a wild Bacchante, raising
The brand aloft, its sparkles shook,
  As she would set the world _a-blazing_!

Thus kindling wild, so fierce and high
  Her altar blazed into the air,
That ALBION, to that fire too nigh,
  Shrunk back and shuddered at its glare!

Next, SPAIN, so new was light to her,
  Leapt at the torch--but, ere the spark
That fell upon her shrine could stir,
  'Twas quenched--and all again was dark.

Yet, no--_not_ quenched--a treasure worth
  So much to mortals rarely dies:
Again her living light lookt forth,
  And shone, a beacon, in all eyes.

Who next received the flame? alas!
  Unworthy NAPLES--shame of shames,
That ever thro' such hands should pass
  That brightest of all earthly flames!

Scarce had her fingers touched the torch.
  When, frighted by the sparks it shed,
Nor waiting even to feel the scorch,
  She dropt it to the earth--and fled.

And fallen it might have long remained;
  But GREECE, who saw her moment now,
Caught up the prize, tho' prostrate, stained,
  And waved it round her beauteous brow.

And Fancy bade me mark where, o'er
  Her altar, as its flame ascended,
Fair, laurelled spirits seemed to soar,
  Who thus in song their voices blended:--

"Shine, shine for ever, glorious Flame,
  "Divinest gift of Gods to men!
"From GREECE thy earliest splendor came,
  "To GREECE thy ray returns again.

"Take, Freedom, take thy radiant round,
  "When _dimmed_, revive, when lost, return,
"Till not a shrine thro' earth be found,
  "On which thy glories shall not burn."






FABLE IV.

THE FLY AND THE BULLOCK.


PROEM.

Of all that, to the sage's survey,
This world presents of topsy-turvy,
There's naught so much disturbs one's patience,
As little minds in lofty stations.
'Tis like that sort of painful wonder.
Which slender columns, laboring under
  Enormous arches, give beholders;--
Or those poor Caryatides,
Condemned to smile and stand at ease,
  With a whole house upon their shoulders.

If as in some few royal cases,
Small minds are _born_ into such places--
If they are there by Right Divine
  Or any such sufficient reason,
Why--Heaven forbid we should repine!--
  To wish it otherwise were treason;
Nay, even to see it in a vision,
Would be what lawyers call _misprision_.

SIR ROBERT FILMER saith--and he,
  Of course, knew all about the matter--
"Both men and beasts love Monarchy;"
  Which proves how rational the latter.
SIDNEY, we know, or wrong or right.
Entirely differed from the Knight:
Nay, hints a King may lose his head.
  By slipping awkwardly his bridle:--
But this is treasonous, ill-bred,
And (now-a-days, when Kings are led
  In patent snaffles) downright idle.

No, no--it isnt right-line Kings,
(Those sovereign lords in leading strings
Who, from their birth, are Faith-Defenders,)
That move my wrath--'tis your pretenders,
Your mushroom rulers, sons of earth,
Who--not, like t'others, bores by birth,
Establisht _grati Dei_ blockheads,
Born with three kingdoms in their pockets--
Yet, with a brass that nothing stops,
  Push up into the loftiest stations,
And, tho' too dull to manage shops,
  Presume, the dolts, to manage nations!

This class it is, that moves my gall,
And stirs up bile, and spleen and all.
While other senseless things appear
To know the limits of their sphere--
While not a cow on earth romances
So much as to conceit she dances--
While the most jumping frog we know of,
Would scarce at Astley's hope to show off--
Your ***s, your ***s dare,
  Untrained as are their minds, to set them
To _any_ business, _any_ where,
At _any_ time that fools will let them.

But leave we here these upstart things--
My business is just now with Kings;
To whom and to their right-line glory,
I dedicate the following story.

FABLE

The wise men of Egypt were secret as dummies;
  And even when they most condescended to teach,
They packt up their meaning, as they did their mummies,
  In so many wrappers, 'twas out of one's reach.

They were also, good people, much given to Kings--
  Fond of craft and of crocodiles, monkeys and mystery;
But blue-bottle flies were their best beloved things--
  As will partly appear in this very short history.

A Scythian philosopher (nephew, they say,
  To that other great traveller, young Anacharsis,)
Stept into a temple at Memphis one day,
To have a short peep at their mystical farces.

He saw a brisk blue-bottle Fly on an altar,
  Made much of, and worshipt, as something divine;
While a large, handsome Bullock, led there in a halter,
  Before it lay stabbed at the foot of the shrine.

Surprised at such doings, he whispered his teacher--
  "If 'tisn't impertinent, may I ask why
"Should a Bullock, that useful and powerful creature,
  "Be thus offered up to a bluebottle Fly?"

"No wonder"--said t'other--"you stare at the sight,
  "But we as a Symbol of Monarchy view it--
"That Fly on the shrine is Legitimate Right,
  "And that Bullock, the People that's sacrificed to it."






FABLE V.

CHURCH AND STATE.


PROEM


    "The moment any religion becomes national, or established, its purity
    must certainly be lost, because it is then impossible to keep it
    unconnected with men's interests; and, if connected, it must
    inevitably be perverted by them."
    --SOAME JENYNS


Thus did SOAME JENYNS--tho' a Tory,
  A Lord of Trade and the Plantations;
Feel how Religion's simple glory
  Is stained by State associations.

When CATHARINE, ere she crusht the Poles,
  Appealed to the benign Divinity;
Then cut them up in protocols,
Made fractions of their very souls--
  All in the name of the blest Trinity;
Or when her grandson, ALEXANDER,
That mighty Northern salamander,[1]
Whose icy touch, felt all about,
Puts every fire of Freedom out--
When he, too, winds up his Ukases
With God and the Panagia's praises--
When he, of royal Saints the type,
  In holy water dips the sponge,
With which, at one imperial wipe,
  He would all human rights expunge;
When LOUIS (whom as King, and eater,
Some name _Dix-huit_, and some _Deshuitres_.)
Calls down "St. Louis's God" to witness
The right, humanity, and fitness
Of sending eighty thousand Solons,
  Sages with muskets and laced coats,
To cram instruction, _nolens volens_,
  Down the poor struggling Spaniards' throats--
I cant help thinking, (tho' to Kings
   I must, of course, like other men, bow,)
That when a Christian monarch brings
Religion's name to gloss these things--
   Such blasphemy out-Benbows Benbow![2]

   Or--not so far for facts to roam,
Having a few much nearer home-
When we see Churchmen, who, if askt,
"Must Ireland's slaves be tithed, and taskt,
"And driven, like Negroes or Croats,
   "That _you_ may roll in wealth and bliss?"
Look from beneath their shovel hats
   With all due pomp and answer "Yes!"
But then, if questioned, "Shall the brand
"Intolerance flings throughout that land,--
"Shall the fierce strife now taught to grow
'Betwixt her palaces and hovels,
"Be ever quenched?"--from the same shovels
Look grandly forth and answer "No."--
Alas, alas! have _these_ a claim
To merciful Religion's name?
If more you seek, go see a bevy
Of bowing parsons at a levee--
(Choosing your time, when straw's before
Some apoplectic bishop's door,)
Then if thou canst with life escape
That rush of lawn, that press of crape,
Just watch their reverences and graces,
   As on each smirking suitor frisks,
And say, if those round shining faces
   To heaven or earth most turn their disks?
This, this it is--Religion, made,
Twixt Church and State, a truck, a trade--
This most ill-matched, unholy _Co_.,
From whence the ills we witness flow;
The war of many creeds with one--
The extremes of _too_ much faith and none--
Till, betwixt ancient trash and new,
'Twixt Cant and Blasphemy--the two
Rank ills with which this age is curst--
We can no more tell which is worst,
Than erst could Egypt, when so rich
In various plagues, determine which
She thought most pestilent and vile,
Her frogs, like Benbow and Carlisle,
Croaking their native mud-notes loud,
Or her fat locusts, like a cloud
Of pluralists, obesely lowering,
At once benighting and devouring!--

This--this it is--and here I pray
   Those sapient wits of the Reviews.
Who make us poor, dull authors say,
   Not what we mean, but what they choose;
Who to our most abundant shares
Of nonsense add still more of theirs,
And are to poets just such evils
   As caterpillars find those flies,[3]
Which, not content to sting like devils,
   Lay eggs upon their backs like wise--
To guard against such foul deposits
  Of other's meaning in my rhymes,
(A thing more needful here because it's
  A subject, ticklish in these times)--
I, here, to all such wits make known,
  Monthly and Weekly, Whig and Tory,
'Tis _this_ Religion--this alone--
  I aim at in the following story:--

FABLE.

When Royalty was young and bold,
  Ere, touched by Time, he had become--
If 'tisn't civil to say _old_,
  At least, a _ci-devant jeune homme_;

One evening, on some wild pursuit
  Driving along, he chanced to see
Religion, passing by on foot,
  And took him in his vis--vis.

This said Religion was a Friar,
  The humblest and the best of men,
Who ne'er had notion or desire
  Of riding in a coach till then.

"I say"--quoth Royalty, who rather
  Enjoyed a masquerading joke--
"I say, suppose, my good old father,
  "You lend me for a while your cloak."

The Friar consented--little knew
  What tricks the youth had in his head;
Besides, was rather tempted too
  By a laced coat he got instead.

Away ran Royalty, slap-dash,
  Scampering like mad about the town;
Broke windows, shivered lamps to smash,
  And knockt whole scores of watchmen down.

While naught could they, whose heads were broke,
  Learn of the "why" or the "wherefore,"
Except that 'twas Religion's cloak
  The gentleman, who crackt them, wore,

Meanwhile, the Friar, whose head was turned
  By the laced coat, grew frisky too;
Lookt big--his former habits spurned--
  And stormed about, as great men do:

Dealt much in pompous oaths and curses--
  Said "Damn you" often, or as bad--
Laid claim to other people's purses--
  In short, grew either knaves or mad.

As work like this was unbefitting,
  And flesh and blood no longer bore it,
The Court of Common Sense, then sitting,
  Summoned the culprits both before it.

Where, after hours in wrangling spent
  (As Courts must wrangle to decide well).
Religion to St. Luke's was sent,
  And Royalty packt off to Bridewell.

With this proviso--should they be
  Restored, in due time, to their senses,
They both must give security,
  In future, against such offences--
Religion ne'er to _lend his cloak_,
  Seeing what dreadful work it leads to;
And Royalty to crack his joke,--
  But _not_ to crack poor people's heads too.


[1] The salamander is supposed to have the power of extinguishing fire by
its natural coldness and moisture.

[2] A well-known publisher of irreligious books.

[3] "The greatest number of the ichneumon tribe are seen settling upon the
back of the caterpillar, and darting at different intervals their stings
into its body--at every dart they deposit an egg"--GOLDSMITH.






FABLE VI.

THE LITTLE GRAND LAMA.


PROEM.

Novella, a young Bolognese,
  The daughter of a learned Law Doctor,[1]
Who had with all the subtleties
  Of old and modern jurists stockt her,
Was so exceeding fair, 'tis said,
  And over hearts held such dominion,
That when her father, sick in bed,
Or busy, sent her, in his stead,
  To lecture on the Code Justinian,
She had a curtain drawn before her,
  Lest, if her charms were seen, the students
Should let their young eyes wander o'er her,
  And quite forget their jurisprudence.
Just so it is with Truth, when _seen_,
  Too dazzling far,--'tis from behind
A light, thin allegoric screen,
  She thus can safest leach mankind.

FABLE.

In Thibet once there reigned, we're told,
A little Lama, one year old--
Raised to the throne, that realm to bless,
Just when his little Holiness
Had cut--as near as can be reckoned--
Some say his _first_ tooth, some his _second_.
Chronologers and Nurses vary,
Which proves historians should be wary.
We only know the important truth,
His Majesty _had_ cut a tooth.
And much his subjects were enchanted,--
  As well all Lamas' subjects _may_ be,
And would have given their heads, if wanted,
  To make tee-totums for the baby.
Throned as he was by Right Divine--
  (What Lawyers call _Jure Divino_,
Meaning a right to yours and mine
  And everybody's goods and rhino.)
Of course, his faithful subjects' purses
  Were ready with their aids and succors;
Nothing was seen but pensioned Nurses;
  And the land groaned with bibs and tuckers.

Oh! had there been a Hume or Bennet,
Then sitting in the Thibet Senate,
Ye Gods! what room for long debates
Upon the Nursery Estimates!
What cutting down of swaddling-clothes
  And pinafores, in nightly battles!
What calls for papers to expose
  The waste of sugar-plums and rattles!
But no--if Thibet _had_ M.P.s,
They were far better bred than these;
Nor gave the slightest opposition,
During the Monarch's whole dentition.

But short this calm;--for, just when he,
Had reached the alarming age of three,
When Royal natures and no doubt
Those of _all_ noble beasts break out--
The Lama, who till then was quiet,
Showed symptoms of a taste for riot;
And, ripe for mischief, early, late,
Without regard for Church or State,
Made free with whosoe'er came nigh;
  Tweakt the Lord Chancellor by the nose,
Turned all the Judges' wigs awry,
  And trod on the old Generals' toes;
Pelted the Bishops with hot buns,
  Rode cock-horse on the City maces,
And shot from little devilish guns,
  Hard peas into the subjects' faces.
In short, such wicked pranks he played,
  And' grew so mischievous, God bless him!
That his Chief Nurse--with even the aid
Of an Archbishop--was afraid.
  When in these moods, to comb or dress him.
Nay, even the persons most inclined
  Thro' thick and thin, for Kings to stickle,
Thought him (if they'd but speak their mind;
  Which they did _not_) an odious pickle.

At length some patriot lords--a breed
  Of animals they've got in Thibet,
Extremely rare and fit indeed
  For folks like Pidcock, to exhibit--
Some patriot lords, who saw the length
To which things went, combined their strength,
And penned a manly, plain and free,
Remonstrance to the Nursery;
Protesting warmly that they yielded
To none that ever went before 'em,
In loyalty to him who wielded
  The hereditary pap-spoon o'er 'em;
That, as for treason, 'twas a thing
  That made them almost sick to think of--
That they and theirs stood by the King,
  Throughout his measles and his chincough,
When others, thinking him consumptive,
Had ratted to the Heir Presumptive!--
But, still--tho' much admiring Kings
(And chiefly those in leading-strings),
They saw, with shame and grief of soul,
  There was no longer now the wise
And constitutional control
  Of _birch_ before their ruler's eyes;
But that of late such pranks and tricks
  And freaks occurred the whole day long,
As all but men with bishoprics
  Allowed, in even a King, were wrong.
Wherefore it was they humbly prayed
  That Honorable Nursery,
That such reforms be henceforth made,
  As all good men desired to see;--
In other words (lest they might seem
Too tedious), as the gentlest scheme
For putting all such pranks to rest,
  And in its bud the mischief nipping--
They ventured humbly to suggest
  His Majesty should have a whipping!

When this was read, no Congreve rocket,
  Discharged into the Gallic trenches
E'er equalled the tremendous shock it
  Produced upon the Nursery benches.
The Bishops, who of course had votes,
By right of age and petticoats,
Were first and foremost in the fuss--
  "What, whip a Lama! suffer birch
"To touch his sacred--infamous!
"Deistical!--assailing thus
  "The fundamentals of the Church!--
"No--no--such patriot plans as these,
"(So help them Heaven--and their Sees!)
"They held to be rank blasphemies."

The alarm thus given, by these and other
  Grave ladies of the Nursery side,
Spread thro' the land, till, such a pother,
  Such party squabbles, far and wide,
Never in history's page had been
Recorded, as were then between
The Whippers and Non-whippers seen.
Till, things arriving at a state,
  Which gave some fears of revolution,
The patriot lords' advice, tho' late,
  Was put at last in execution.
The Parliament of Thibet met--
  The little Lama, called before it,
Did, then and there, his whipping get,
And (as the _Nursery Gazette_
  Assures us) like a hero bore it.

And tho', 'mong Thibet Tories, some
Lament that Royal Martyrdom
(Please to observe, the letter D
In this last word's pronounced like B),
Yet to the example of that Prince
  So much is Thibet's land a debtor,
That her long line of Lamas, since,
  Have all behaved themselves _much_ better.


[1] Andreas.






FABLE VII.

THE EXTINGUISHERS.


PROEM.

Tho' soldiers are the true supports,
The natural allies of Courts,
Woe to the Monarch, who depends
Too _much_ on his red-coated friends;
For even soldiers sometimes _think_--
  Nay, Colonels have been known to _reason_,--

And reasoners, whether clad in pink
Or red or blue, are on the brink
  (Nine cases out of ten) of treason

Not many soldiers, I believe, are
  As fond of liberty as Mina;
Else--woe to Kings! when Freedom's fever
  Once turns into a _Scarletina_!
For then--but hold--'tis best to veil
My meaning in the following tale:--

FABLE.

A Lord of Persia, rich and great,
Just come into a large estate,
Was shockt to find he had, for neighbors,
Close to his gate, some rascal Ghebers,
Whose fires, beneath his very nose,
In heretic combustion rose.
But Lords of Persia can, no doubt,
  Do what they will--so, one fine morning,
He turned the rascal Ghebers out,
  First giving a few kicks for warning.
Then, thanking Heaven most piously,
  He knockt their Temple to the ground,
Blessing himself for joy to see
  Such Pagan ruins strewed around.
But much it vext my Lord to find,
  That, while all else obeyed his will,
The Fire these Ghebers left behind,
  Do what he would, kept burning still.
Fiercely he stormed, as if his frown
Could scare the bright insurgent down;
But, no--such fires are headstrong things,
And care not much for Lords or Kings.
Scarce could his Lordship well contrive
  The flashes in _one_ place to smother,
Before--hey presto!--all alive,
  They sprung up freshly in another.

At length when, spite of prayers and damns,
  'Twas found the sturdy flame defied him,
His stewards came, with low _salams_,
  Offering, by _contract_, to provide him
Some large Extinguishers, (a plan,
Much used, they said, at Ispahan,
Vienna, Petersburg--in short,
Wherever Light's forbid at court),
Machines no Lord should be without,
Which would at once put promptly out
All kinds of fires,--from staring, stark
Volcanoes to the tiniest spark;
Till all things slept as dull and dark,
As in a great Lord's neighborhood
'Twas right and fitting all things should.

Accordingly, some large supplies
  Of these Extinguishers were furnisht
(All of the true Imperial size),
  And there, in rows, stood black and burnisht,
Ready, where'er a gleam but shone
Of light or fire, to be clapt on.

But ah! how lordly wisdom errs,
In trusting to extinguishers!
One day, when he had left all sure,
(At least, so thought he) dark, secure--
The flame, at all its exits, entries,
  Obstructed to his heart's content,
And black extinguishers, like sentries,
  Placed over every dangerous vent--
Ye Gods, imagine his amaze,
  His wrath, his rage, when, on returning,
He found not only the old blaze,
  Brisk as before, crackling and burning,--
Not only new, young conflagrations,
Popping up round in various stations--
But still more awful, strange and dire,
The Extinguishers themselves on fire!![1]
They, they--those trusty, blind machines
  His Lordship had so long been praising,
As, under Providence, the means
  Of keeping down all lawless blazing,
Were now, themselves--alas, too true,
The shameful fact--turned blazers too,
And by a change as odd as cruel
Instead of dampers, served for fuel!
Thus, of his only hope bereft,
  "What," said the great man, "must be done?"--
All that, in scrapes like this, is left
  To great men is--to cut and run.
So run he did; while to their grounds,
  The banisht Ghebers blest returned;
And, tho' their Fire had broke its bounds,
  And all abroad now wildly burned,
Yet well could they, who loved the flame,
Its wandering, its excess reclaim;
And soon another, fairer Dome
Arose to be its sacred home,
Where, cherisht, guarded, not confined,
The living glory dwelt inshrined,
And, shedding lustre strong, but even,
Tho' born of earth, grew worthy heaven.

MORAL.

The moral hence my Muse infers
  Is, that such Lords are simple elves,
In trusting to Extinguishers,
  That are combustible themselves.


[1] The idea of this Fable was caught from one of those brilliant _mots_,
which abound in the conversation of my friend, the author of the "Letters
to Julia,"--a production which contains some of the happiest specimens of
playful poetry that have appeared in this or any age.






FABLE VIII.

LOUIS FOURTEENTH'S WIG.


The money raised--the army ready--
Drums beating, and the Royal Neddy
Valiantly braying in the van,
To the old tune "_"Eh, eh, Sire ne_!"[1]--
Naught wanting, but some _coup_ dramatic,
  To make French _sentiment_ explode,
Bring in, at once, the _got_ fanatic,
  And make the war "_la dernire mode_"--
Instantly, at the _Pavillon Marsan_,
  Is held an Ultra consultation--
What's to be done, to help the farce on?
  What stage-effect, what decoration,
To make this beauteous France forget,
In one, grand, glorious _pirouette_,
All she had sworn to but last week,
And, with a cry of _Magnifique_!"
Rush forth to this, or _any_ war,
Without inquiring once--"What for?"
After some plans proposed by each.
Lord Chateaubriand made a speech,
(Quoting, to show what men's rights are,
  Or rather what men's rights _should be_,
From Hobbes, Lord Castlereagh, the Tsar,
  And other friends to Liberty,)
Wherein he--having first protested
'Gainst humoring the mob--suggested
(As the most high-bred plan he saw
For giving the new War _clat_)
A grand, Baptismal Melo-drame,
To be got up at Notre Dame,
In which the Duke (who, bless his Highness!
  Had by his _hilt_ acquired such fame,
'Twas hoped that he as little shyness
  Would show, when to _the point_ he came,)
Should, for his deeds so lion-hearted,
Be christened _Hero_, ere he started;
With power, by Royal Ordonnance,
To bear that name--at least in France.
Himself--the Viscount Chateaubriand--
(To help the affair with more _esprit_ on)
Offering, for this baptismal rite,
  Some of his own famed Jordan water[2]--
(Marie Louise not having quite
  Used all that, for young Nap, he brought her.)
The baptism, in _this_ case, to be
Applied to that extremity,
Which Bourbon heroes most expose;
And which (as well all Europe knows)
Happens to be, in this Defender
Of the true Faith, extremely tender.

Or if (the Viscount said) this scheme
Too rash and premature should seem--
If thus discounting heroes, _on_ tick--
  This glory, by anticipation,
Was too much in the _genre romantique_
  For such a highly classic nation,
He begged to say, the Abyssinians
A practice had in their dominions,
Which, if at Paris got up well.
In full _costume_, was sure to tell.
At all great epochs, good or ill,
  They have, says BRUCE (and BRUCE ne'er budges
From the strict truth), a Grand Quadrille
  In public danced by the Twelve Judges[3]--
And he assures us, the grimaces,
The _entre-chats_, the airs and graces
Of dancers, so profound and stately,
Divert the Abyssinians greatly.

"Now (said the Viscount), there's but few
"Great Empires where this plan would do:
"For instance, England;--let them take
  "What pains they would--'twere vain to strive--
"The twelve stiff Judges there would make
  "The worst Quadrille-set now alive.
"One must have seen them, ere one could
"Imagine properly JUDGE WOOD,
"Performing, in hie wig, so gayly,
"A _queue-de chat_ with JUSTICE BAILLY!
"_French_ Judges, tho', are, by no means,
"This sort of stiff, be-wigged machines;
"And we, who've seen them at _Saumur_
"And _Poitiers_ lately, may be sure
"They'd dance quadrilles or anything,
"That would be pleasing to the King--
"Nay, stand upon their heads, and more do,
"To please the little Duc de Bordeaux!"

After these several schemes there came
Some others--needless now to name,
Since that, which Monsieur planned, himself,
Soon doomed all others to the shelf,
And was received _par acclamation_
As truly worthy the _Grande Nation_.

It seems (as Monsieur told the story)
That LOUIS the Fourteenth,--that glory,
That _Coryphe_ of all crowned pates,--
That pink of the Legitimates--
Had, when, with many a pious prayer, he
Bequeathed unto the Virgin Mary
His marriage deeds, and _cordon bleu_,
Bequeathed to her his State Wig too--
(An offering which, at Court, 'tis thought,
The Virgin values as she ought)--
That Wig, the wonder of all eyes,
The Cynosure of Gallia's skies,
To watch and tend whose curls adored,
  Re-build its towering roof, when flat,
And round its rumpled base, a Board
  Of sixty barbers daily sat,
With Subs, on State-Days, to assist,
Well pensioned from the Civil List:--
That wondrous Wig, arrayed in which,
And formed alike to awe or witch.
He beat all other heirs of crowns,
In taking mistresses and towns,
Requiring but a shot at _one_,
A smile at _t'other_, and 'twas done!--

  "That Wig" (said Monsieur, while his brow
Rose proudly,) "is existing now;--
"That Grand Perruque, amid the fall
  "Of every other Royal glory,
"With curls erect survives them all,
  "And tells in every hair their story.
"Think, think, how welcome at this time
"A relic, so beloved, sublime!
"What worthier standard of the Cause
  "Of Kingly Right can France demand?
"Or who among our ranks can pause
  "To guard it, while a curl shall stand?
"Behold, my friends"--(while thus he cried,
A curtain, which concealed this pride
Of Princely Wigs was drawn aside)
"Behold that grand Perruque--how big
  "With recollections for the world--
"For France--for us--Great Louis's Wig,
  "By HIPPOLYTE new frizzed and curled--
"_New frizzed_! alas, 'tis but too true,
"Well may you start at that word _new_--
"But such the sacrifice, my friends,
"The Imperial Cossack recommends;
"Thinking such small concessions sage,
"To meet the spirit of the age,
"And do what best that spirit flatters,
"In Wigs--if not in weightier matters.
  "Wherefore to please the Tsar, and show
"That _we_ too, much-wronged Bourbons, know
"What liberalism in Monarchs is,
"We have conceded the New Friz!
"Thus armed, ye gallant Ultras, say,
"Can men, can Frenchmen, fear the fray?
"With this proud relic in our van,
  "And D'ANGOULEME our worthy leader,
"Let rebel Spain do all she can,
  "Let recreant England arm and feed her,--
"Urged by that pupil of HUNT'S school,
"That Radical, Lord LIVERPOOL--
"France can have naught to fear--far from it--
  "When once astounded Europe sees
"The Wig of LOUIS, like a Comet,
  "Streaming above the Pyrenes,
"All's o'er with Spain--then on, my sons,
  "On, my incomparable Duke,
"And, shouting for the Holy Ones,
  "Cry _Vive la Guerre--et la Perrugue!"_


[1] They celebrated in the dark ages, at many churches, particularly at
Rouen, what was called the Feast of the Ass. On this occasion the ass,
finely drest, was brought before the altar, and they sung before him this
elegant anthem, "_Eh, eh, eh, Sire ne, eh, eh, eh. Sire ne_."--
WARTEN'S Essay on Pope.

[2] Brought from the river Jordan by M. Chateaubriand, and presented to
the French Empress for the christening of young Napoleon.

[3] "On certain great occasions, the twelve Judges (who are generally
between sixty and seventy years of age) sing the song and dance the
figure-dance," etc.--Book. v.








THE FUDGE FAMILY IN PARIS.


    _Le Leggi della Maschera richiedono che una persona mascherata non
    sia salutata per nome da uno che la conosce malgrado il suo
    travestimento_.
    CASTIGLIONE.




PREFACE.


In what manner the following Epistles came into my hands, it is not
necessary for the public to know. It will be seen by Mr. FUDGE'S Second
Letter, that he is one of those gentlemen whose _Secret Services_ in
Ireland, under the mild ministry of my Lord CASTLEREAGH, have been so
amply and gratefully remunerated. Like his friend and associate, THOMAS
REYNOLDS, Esq., he had retired upon the reward of his honest industry; but
has lately been induced to appear again in active life, and superintend
the training of that _Delatorian Cohort_ which Lord SIDMOUTH, in his
wisdom and benevolence, has organized.

Whether Mr. FUDGE, himself, has yet made any discoveries, does not appear
from the following pages. But much may be expected from a person of his
zeal and sagacity, and, indeed, to _him_, Lord SIDMOUTH, and the
Greenland-bound ships, the eyes of all lovers of _discoveries_ are now
most anxiously directed.

I regret much that I have been obliged to omit Mr. BOB FUDGE'S Third
Letter, concluding the adventures of his Day with the Dinner, Opera, etc.;
--but, in consequence of some remarks upon Marinette's thin drapery,
which, it was thought, might give offence to certain well-meaning persons,
the manuscript was sent back to Paris for his revision and had not
returned when the last sheet was put to press.

It will not, I hope, be thought presumptuous, if I take this opportunity
of complaining of a very serious injustice I have suffered from the
public. Dr. KING wrote a treatise to prove that BENTLEY "was not the
author of his own book," and a similar absurdity has been asserted of
_me_, in almost all the best-informed literary circles. With the name of
the real author staring them in the face, they have yet persisted in
attributing my works to other people; and the fame of the "Twopenny Post-
Bag"--such as it is--having hovered doubtfully over various persons, has
at last settled upon the head of a certain little gentleman, who wears it,
I understand, as complacently as if it actually belonged to him.

I can only add, that if any lady or gentleman, curious in such matters,
will take the trouble of calling at my lodgings, 245 Piccadilly, I shall
have the honor of assuring them, _in propri person_, that I am--his, or
her,

Very obedient and very humble Servant,

_April_ 17, 1818.

THOMAS BROWN THE YOUNGER.






THE FUDGE FAMILY IN PARIS






LETTER I.

FROM MISS BIDDY FUDGE TO MISS DOROTHY ----,
OF CLONKILTY, IN IRELAND.


Amiens.

Dear DOLL, while the tails of our horses are plaiting,
  The trunks tying on, and Papa, at the door,
Into very bad French is as usual translating
  His English resolve not to give a _sou_ more,
I sit down to write you a line--only think!--
A letter from France, with French pens and French ink,
How delightful! tho', would you believe it, my dear?
I have seen nothing yet _very_ wonderful here;
No adventure, no sentiment, far as we've come,
But the cornfields and trees quite as dull as at home;
And _but_ for the post-boy, his boots and his queue,
I might _just_ as well be at Clonkilty with you!
In vain, at DESSEIN'S, did I take from my trunk
That divine fellow, STERNE, and fall reading "The Monk;"
In vain did I think of his charming Dead Ass,
And remember the crust and the wallet--alas!
No monks can be had now for love or for money,
(All owing, Pa says, to that infidel BONEY;)
And, tho' _one_ little Neddy we saw in our drive
Out of classical Nampont, the beast was alive!

  By the by, tho' at Calais, Papa _had_ a touch
Of romance on the pier, which affected me much.
At the sight of that spot, where our darling DIXHUIT
Set the first of his own dear legitimate feet,[1]
(Modelled out so exactly, and--God bless the mark!
'Tis a foot, DOLLY, worthy so _Grand a Monarque_).
He exclaimed, "_Oh, mon Roi_!" and, with tear-dropping eye,
Stood to gaze on the spot--while some Jacobin, nigh,
Muttered out with a shrug (what an insolent thing!)
"_Ma foi_, he be right--'tis de Englishman's King;
And dat _gros pied de cochon_--begar me vil say
Dat de foot look mosh better, if turned toder way."
There's the pillar, too--Lord! I had nearly forgot--
What a charming idea!--raised close to the spot;
The mode being now, (as you've heard, I suppose,)
To build tombs over legs and raise pillars to toes.
  This is all that's occurred sentimental as yet;
Except indeed some little flower-nymphs we've met,
Who disturb one's romance with pecuniary views,
Flinging flowers in your path, and then--bawling for _sous_!
And some picturesque beggars, whose multitudes seem
To recall the good days of the _ancien regime_,
All as ragged and brisk, you'll be happy to learn,
And as thin as they were in the time of poor STERNE.

  Our party consists (in a neat Calais job)
Of Papa and myself, Mr. CONNOR and BOB.
You remember how sheepish BOB lookt at Kilrandy,
But, Lord! he's quite altered--they've made him a Dandy;
A thing, you know, whiskered, great-coated, and laced,
Like an hour-glass, exceedingly small in the waist;
Quite a new sort of creatures, unknown yet to scholars,
With beads so immovably stuck in shirt-collars,
That seats, like our music-stools, soon must be found them,
To twirl, when the creatures may wish, to look round them,
In short, dear, "a Dandy" describes what I mean,
And BOB's far the best of the _genus_ I've seen:
An improving young man, fond of learning, ambitious,
And goes now to Paris to study French dishes.
Whose names--think, how quick! he already knows pat,
_ la braise, petits pts_, and--what d' ye call that
They inflict on potatoes?--oh! _matre d'htel_--
I assure you, dear DOLLY, he knows them as well
As if nothing else all his life he had eat,
Tho' a bit of them BOBBY has never touched yet;
But just knows the names of French dishes and cooks,
As dear Pa knows the titles of authors and books.

As to Pa, what d' ye think?--mind, it's all _entre nous_,
But you know, love, I never keep secrets from you--
Why, he's writing a book--what! a tale? a romance?
No, we Gods, would it were!--but his travels in France;
At the special desire (he let out t'other day)
Of his great friend and patron, my Lord CASTLEREAGH,
Who said, "My dear FUDGE"--I forget the exact words,
And, it's strange, no one ever remembers my Lord's;
But 'twas something to say that, as all must allow
A good orthodox work is much wanting just now,
To expound to the world the new--thingummie--science,
Found out by the--what's-its-name--Holy Alliance,
And prove to mankind that their rights are but folly,
Their freedom a joke (which it _is_, you know, DOLLY),
"There's none," said his Lordship, "if _I_ may be judge,
Half so fit for this great undertaking as FUDGE!"

The matter's soon, settled--Pa flies to _the Row_
(The _first_ stage your tourists now usually go),
Settles all for his quarto--advertisements, praises--
Starts post from the door, with his tablets--French phrases--
"SCOTT'S Visit" of course--in short, everything _he_ has
An author can want, except words and ideas:--
And, lo! the first thing, in the spring of the year,
Is PHIL. FUDGE at the front of a Quarto, my dear!
But, bless me, my paper's near out, so I'd better
Draw fast to a close:--this exceeding long letter
You owe to a _djener  la fourchette_,
Which BOBBY _would_ have, and is hard at it yet.--
What's next? oh? the tutor, the last of the party,
Young CONNOR:--they say he's so like BONAPARTE,
His nose and his chin--which Papa rather dreads,
As the Bourbons, you know, are suppressing all heads
That resemble old NAP'S, and who knows but their honors
May think, in their fright, of suppressing poor CONNOR'S?
_Au reste_ (as we say), the young lad's well enough,
Only talks much of Athens, Rome, virtue and stuff;
A third cousin of ours, by the way--poor as Job
  (Tho' of royal descent by the side of Mamma),
And for charity made private tutor to BOB;
  _Entre nous_, too, a Papist--how liberal of Pa!

This is all, dear,--forgive me for breaking off thus,
But BOB'S _djener_'s done, and Papa's in a fuss.

B. F.

P. S.

How provoking of Pa! he will not let me stop
Just to run in and rummage some milliner's shop;
And my _dbut_ in Paris, I blush to think on it,
Must now, DOLL, be made in a hideous low bonnet.
But Paris, dear Paris!--oh, _there_ will be joy,
And romance, and high bonnets, and Madame Le Roi![2]


[1] To commemorate the landing of Louis le Dsir from England,
the impression of his foot is marked out on the pier at Calais, and a
pillar with an inscription raised opposite to the spot.

[2] A celebrated mantua-maker in Paris.






LETTER II.

FROM PHIL. FUDGE, ESQ., TO THE LORD VISCOUNT CASTLEREAGH.


Paris.

At length, my Lord, I have the bliss
To date to you a line from this
"Demoralized" metropolis;
Where, by plebeians low and scurvy,
The throne was turned quite topsy-turvy,
And Kingship, tumbled from its seat,
"Stood prostrate" at the people's feet;
Where (still to use your Lordship's tropes)
The _level_ of obedience _slopes_
Upward and downward, as the _stream_
Of _hydra_ faction _kicks the beam_![1]
Where the poor Palace changes masters
  Quicker than a snake its skin,
And LOUIS is rolled out on castors,
  While BONEY'S borne on shoulders in:--
But where, in every change, no doubt,
  One special good your Lordship traces,--
That 'tis the _Kings_ alone turn out,
The _Ministers_ still keep their places.

How oft, dear Viscount CASTLEREAGH,
I've thought of thee upon the way,
As in my _job_ (what place could be
More apt to wake a thought of thee?)--
Or, oftener far, when gravely sitting
Upon my dicky, (as is fitting
For him who writes a Tour, that he
May more of men and manners see.)
I've thought of thee and of thy glories,
Thou guest of Kings and King of Tories!
Reflecting how thy fame has grown
  And spread, beyond man's usual share,
At home, abroad, till thou art known,
  Like Major SEMPLE, everywhere!
And marvelling with what powers of breath
Your Lordship, having speeched to death
Some hundreds of your fellow-men,
Next speeched to Sovereign's ears,--and when
All Sovereigns else were dozed, at last
Speeched down the Sovereign of Belfast.
Oh! mid the praises and the trophies
Thou gain'st from Morosophs and Sophis;
Mid all the tributes to thy fame,
  There's one thou shouldst be chiefly pleased at--
That Ireland gives her snuff thy name,
  And CASTLEREAGH'S the thing now sneezed at!

But hold, my pen!--a truce to praising--
  Tho' even your Lordship will allow
The theme's temptations are amazing;
  But time and ink run short, and now,
(As _thou_ wouldst say, my guide and teacher
  In these gay metaphorie fringes,
I must _embark_ into the _feature_
  On which this letter chiefly _hinges_;)
My Book, the Book that is to prove--
And _will_, (so help ye Sprites above,
That sit on clouds, as grave as judges,
Watching the labors of the FUDGES!)
_Will_ prove that all the world, at present,
Is in a state extremely pleasant;
That Europe--thanks to royal swords
  And bayonets, and the Duke commanding--
Enjoys a peace which, like the Lord's,
  Passeth all human understanding:
That France prefers her go-cart King
  To such a coward scamp as BONEY;
Tho' round, with each a leading-string.
  There standeth many a Royal crony,
For fear the chubby, tottering thing
  Should fall, if left there _loney-poney_;--
That England, too, the more her debts,
The more she spends, the richer gets;
And that the Irish, grateful nation!
  Remember when by _thee_ reigned over,
And bless thee for their flagellation,
As HELOISA did her lover![2]--
That Poland, left for Russia's lunch
  Upon the sideboard, snug reposes:
While Saxony's as pleased as Punch,
  And Norway "on a bed of roses!"
That, as for some few million souls,
  Transferred by contract, bless the clods!
If half were strangled--Spaniards, Poles,
  And Frenchmen--'twouldn't make much odds,
So Europe's goodly Royal ones
Sit easy on their sacred thrones;
So FERDINAND embroiders gayly,[3]
And Louis eats his _salmi_ daily;
So time is left to Emperor SANDY
To be _half_ Caesar and _half_ Dandy;
And GEORGE the REGENT (who'd forget
That doughtiest chieftain of the set?)
Hath wherewithal for trinkets new,
  For dragons, after Chinese models,
And chambers where Duke Ho and Soo
  Might come and nine times knock their noddles!--
All this my Quarto'll prove--much more
Than Quarto ever proved before:--
In reasoning with the _Post_ I'll vie,
My facts the _Courier_ shall supply,
My jokes VANSITTART, PEELE my sense,
And thou, sweet Lord, my eloquence!

My Journal, penned by fits and starts,
  On BIDDY'S back or BOBBY'S shoulder,
(My son, my Lord, a youth of parts,
  Who longs to be a small placeholder,)
Is--tho' _I_ say't, that shouldnt say--
Extremely good; and, by the way,
_One_ extract from it--_only_ one--
To show its spirit, and I've done.
_"Jul. thirty-first_.--Went, after snack,
  "To the Cathedral of St. Denny;
"Sighed o'er the Kings of ages back,
  "And--gave the old Concierge a penny.
"(_Mem_.--Must see _Rheims_, much famed, 'tis said,
"For making Kings and ginger-bread.)
"Was shown the tomb where lay, so stately,
"A little Bourbon, buried lately,
"Thrice high and puissant, we were told,
"Tho' only twenty-four hours old!
"Hear this, thought I, ye Jacobins:
"Ye Burdetts, tremble in your skins!
"If Royalty, but aged a day,
"Can boast such high and puissant sway
"What impious hand its power would fix,
"Full fledged and wigged at fifty-six!"

The argument's quite new, you see,
And proves exactly Q. E. D.
So now, with duty to the KEGENT,
I am dear Lord,
  Your most obedient,
    P. F.

_Htel Breteuil, Rue Rivoli_.
Neat lodgings--rather dear for me;
But BIDDY said she thought 'twould look!
Genteeler thus to date my Book;
And BIDDY'S right--besides, it curries
Some favor with our friends at MURRAY'S,
Who scorn what any man can say,
That dates from Rue St. Honor![4]


[1] This excellent imitation of the noble Lord's style shows how deeply
Mr. Fudge must have studied his great original. Irish oratory, indeed,
abounds with such startling peculiarities. Thus the eloquent Counsellor
B----, in describing some hypocritical pretender to charity, said, "He put
his hand in his breeches-pocket, like a crocodile, and," etc.

[2] See her Letters.

[3] It would be an edifying thing to write a history of the private
amusements of sovereigns, tracing them down from the fly-sticking of
Domitian, the mole-catching of Artabanus, the, hog-mimicking of
Parmenides, the horse-currying of Aretas, to the petticoat-embroidering of
Ferdinand, and the patience-playing of the Prince Regent!

[4] See the _Quarterly Review_ for May, 1816 where Mr. Hobhouse is
accused of having written his book "in a back street of the French
capital."






LETTER III.

FROM MR. BOB FUDGE TO RICHARD ----, ESQ.


Oh Dick! you may talk of your writing and reading,
Your Logic and Greek, but there's nothing like feeding;
And _this_ is the place for it, DICKY, you dog,
Of all places on earth--the headquarters of Prog!
Talk of England--her famed _Magna Charta_, I swear, is
A humbug, a flam, to the Carte[1] at old VRY'S;
And as for your Juries--_who_ would not set o'er 'em
A Jury of Tasters, with woodcocks before 'em?
Give CARTWRIGHT his Parliaments, fresh every year;
But those friends of _short Commons_ would never do here;
And, let ROMILLY speak as he will on the question.
No Digest of Law's like the laws of digestion!

By the by, DICK, _I_ fatten--but _n'importe_ for that,
'Tis the mode--your Legitimates always get fat.
There's the REGENT, there's LOUIS--and BONEY tried too,
But, tho' somewhat imperial in paunch, 'twouldn't do:--
He improved indeed much in this point when he wed,
But he ne'er grew right royally fat _in the head_.

DICK, DICK, what a place is this Paris!--but stay--
As my raptures may bore you, I'll just sketch a Day,
As we pass it, myself and some comrades I've got,
All thorough-bred _Gnostics_, who know what is what.

After dreaming some hours of the land of Cocaigne,
  That Elysium of all that is _friand_ and nice,
Where for hail they have _bon-bons_, and claret for rain,
 And the skaters in winter show off on _cream_-ice;
Where so ready all nature its cookery yields,
_Macaroni au parmesan_ grows in the fields;
Little birds fly about with the true pheasant taint,
And the geese are all born with a liver complaint!
I rise--put on neck-cloth--stiff, tight, as can be--
For a lad who _goes into the world_, DICK, like me,
Should have his neck tied up, you know--there's no doubt of it--
Almost as tight as _some_ lads who _go out of it_.
With whiskers well oiled, and with boots that "hold up
"The mirror to nature"--so bright you could sup
Off the leather like china; with coat, too, that draws
On the tailor, who suffers, a martyr's applause!--
With head bridled up, like a four-in-hand leader,
And stays--devil's in them--too tight for a feeder,
I strut to the old Caf Hardy, which yet
Beats the field at a _djener a la fourchette_.
There, DICK, what a breakfast!--oh! not like your ghost
Of a breakfast in England, your curst tea and toast;
But a side-board, you dog, where one's eye roves about,
Like a turk's in the Haram, and thence singles out
One's pt of larks, just to tune up the throat,
One's small limbs of chickens, done _en papillote_.
One's erudite cutlets, drest all ways but plain,
Or one's kidneys--imagine, DICK--done with champagne!
Then, some glasses of _Beaune_, to dilute--or, mayhap,
_Chambertin_,[2]which you know's the pet tipple of NAP,
And which Dad, by the by, that legitimate stickler,
Much scruples to taste, but I'm not so partic'lar.--
Your coffee comes next, by prescription: and then DICK's
The coffee's ne'er-failing and glorious appendix,
(If books had but such, my old Grecian, depend on't,
I'd swallow e'en Watkins', for sake of the end on't,)
A neat glass of _parfait-amour_, which one sips
Just as if bottled velvet tipt over one's lips.
This repast being ended, and _paid for_--(how odd!
Till a man's used to paying, there's something so queer in't!)--
The sun now well out, and the girls all abroad,
  And the world enough aired for us Nobs to appear in't,
We lounge up the boulevards, where--oh! DICK, the phizzes,
The turn-outs, we meet--what a nation of quizzes!
Here toddles along some old figure of fun,
With a coat you might date Anno Domini 1.;
A laced hat, worsted stockings, and--noble old soul!
A fine ribbon and cross in his best button-hole;
Just such as our PRINCE, who nor reason nor fun dreads,
Inflicts, without even a court-martial, on hundreds.
Here trips a _grisette_, with a fond, roguish eye,
(Rather eatable things these _grisettes_, by the by);
And there an old _demoiselle_, almost as fond,
In a silk that has stood since the time of the Fronde.
There goes a French Dandy--ah, DICK! unlike some ones
We've seen about WHITE'S--the Mounseers are but rum ones;
Such hats!--fit for monkies--I'd back Mrs. DRAPER
To cut neater weather-boards out of brown paper:
And coats--how I wish, if it wouldn't distress 'em,
They'd club for old BRUMMEL, from Calais, to dress 'em!
The collar sticks out from the neck such a space,
  That you'd swear 'twas the plan of this head-lopping nation,
To leave there behind them a snug little place
  For the head to drop into, on decapitation.
In short, what with mountebanks, counts and friseurs,
_Some_ mummers by trade and the rest amateurs--
What with captains in new jockey-boots and silk breeches,
  Old dustmen with swinging great opera-hats,
And shoeblacks, reclining by statues in niches,
  There never was seen such a race of Jack Sprats!

From the Boulevards--but hearken!--yes--as I'm a sinner,
The clock is just striking the half-hour to dinner:
So _no_ more at present--short time for adorning--
My Day must be finisht some other fine morning.
Now, hey for old BEAUVILLIERS'S[3] larder, my boy!
And, once _there_, if the Goddess of Beauty and Joy
Were to write "Come and kiss me, dear BOB!" I'd not budge--
Not a step, DICK, as sure as my name is
    R. FUDGE.


[1] The Bill of Fare.--Vry, a well-known _Restaurateur_.

[2] The favorite wine of Napoleon.

[3] A celebrated restaurateur.






LETTER IV.

FROM PHELIM CONNOR TO ----


"Return!"--no, never, while the withering hand
Of bigot power is on that hapless land;
While, for the faith my fathers held to God,
Even in the fields where free those fathers trod,
I am proscribed, and--like the spot left bare
In Israel's halls, to tell the proud and fair
Amidst their mirth, that Slavery had been there[1]--
On all I love, home, parents, friends, I trace
The mournful mark of bondage and disgrace!
No!--let _them_ stay, who in their country's pangs
See naught but food for factions and harangues;
Who yearly kneel before their masters' doors
And hawk their wrongs, as beggars do their sores:
Still let your .       .       .       .[2]
       .       .       .       .       .
Still hope and suffer, all who can!--but I,
Who durst not hope, and cannot bear, must fly.

But whither?--every where the scourge pursues--
Turn where he will, the wretched wanderer views,
In the bright, broken hopes of all his race,
Countless reflections of the Oppressor's face.
Every where gallant hearts and spirits true,
Are served up victims to the vile and few;
While England, every where--the general foe
Of Truth and Freedom, wheresoe'er they glow--
Is first, when tyrants strike, to aid the blow.

Oh, England! could such poor revenge atone
For wrongs, that well might claim the deadliest one;
Were it a vengeance, sweet enough to sate
The wretch who flies from thy intolerant hate,
To hear his curses on such barbarous sway
Echoed, where'er he bends his cheerless way;--
Could _this_ content him, every lip he meets
Teems for his vengeance with such poisonous sweets;
Were _this_ his luxury, never is thy name
Pronounced, but he doth banquet on thy shame;
Hears maledictions ring from every side
Upon that grasping power, that selfish pride,
Which vaunts its own and scorns all rights beside;
That low and desperate envy which to blast
A neighbor's blessings risks the few thou hast;--
That monster, Self, too gross to be concealed,
Which ever lurks behind thy proffered shield;--
That faithless craft, which, in thy hour of need,
Can court the slave, can swear he shall be freed,
Yet basely spurns him, when thy point is gained,
Back to his masters, ready gagged and chained!
Worthy associate of that band of Kings,
That royal, ravening flock, whose vampire wings
O'er sleeping Europe treacherously brood,
And fan her into dreams of promist good,
Of hope, of freedom--but to drain her blood!
If _thus_ to hear thee branded be a bliss
That Vengeance loves, there's yet more sweet than this,
That 'twas an Irish head, an Irish heart,
Made thee the fallen and tarnisht thing thou art;
That, as the centaur gave the infected vest
In which he died, to rack his conqueror's breast,
We sent thee CASTLEREAGH:--as heaps of dead
Have slain their slayers by the pest they spread,
So hath our land breathed out, thy fame to dim,
Thy strength to waste and rot thee soul and limb,
Her worst infections all condensed in him!

       *       *       *       *       *

When will the world shake off such yokes? oh, when
Will that redeeming day shine out on men,
That shall behold them rise, erect and free
As Heaven and Nature meant mankind should be!
When Reason shall no longer blindly bow
To the vile pagod things, that o'er her brow,
Like him of Jaghernaut, drive trampling now;
Nor Conquest dare to desolate God's earth;
Nor drunken Victory, with a NERO'S mirth,
Strike her lewd harp amidst a people's groans;--
But, built on love, the world's exalted thrones
Shall to the virtuous and the wise be given--
Those bright, those sole Legitimates of Heaven!

_When_ will this be?--or, oh! is it, in truth,
But one of those sweet, day-break dreams of youth,
In which the Soul, as round her morning springs,
'Twixt sleep and waking, see such dazzling things!
And must the hope, as vain as it is bright,
Be all resigned?--and are _they_ only right,
Who say this world of thinking souls was made
To be by Kings partitioned, truckt and weighed
In scales that, ever since the world begun,
Have counted millions but as dust to one?
Are _they_ the only wise, who laugh to scorn
The rights, the freedom to which man was born?
Who    .       .       .       .       .
       .       .       .       .       .
Who, proud to kiss each separate rod of power,
Bless, while he reigns, the minion of the hour;
Worship each would-be god, that o'er them moves,
And take the thundering of his brass for JOVE'S!
If _this_ be wisdom, then farewell, my books,
Farewell, ye shrines of old, ye classic brooks.
Which fed my soul with currents, pure and fair,
Of living Truth that now must stagnate there!--
Instead of themes that touch the lyre with light,
Instead of Greece and her immortal fight
For Liberty which once awaked my strings,
Welcome the Grand Conspiracy of Kings,
The High Legitimates, the Holy Band,
Who, bolder' even than He of Sparta's land,
Against whole millions, panting to be free,
Would guard the pass of right line tyranny.
Instead of him, the Athenian bard whose blade
Had stood the onset which his pen portrayed,
Welcome        .       .       .       .
       .       .       .       .       .
And, stead of ARISTIDES--woe the day
Such names should mingle!--welcome Castlereagh!

Here break we off, at this unhallowed name.[3]
Like priests of old, when words ill-omened came.
My next shall tell thee, bitterly shall tell.
Thoughts that  .       .       .       .
       .       .       .       .       .
Thoughts that--could patience hold--'twere wiser far
To leave still hid and burning where they are.


[1] "They used to leave a square yard of the wall of the house
unplastered, on which they write, in large letters, either the fore-
mentioned verse of the Psalmist ('If I forget thee, O Jerusalem,' etc.) or
the words--'The memory of the desolation.'"--Leo of Modena.

[2] I have thought it prudent to omit some parts of Mr. Phelim Connor's
letter. He is evidently an intemperate young man, and has associated with
his cousins, the Fudges, to very little purpose.

[3] The late Lord C. of Ireland had a curious theory about names;--he
held that every man with _three_ names was a Jacobin.






LETTER V.

FROM MISS BIDDY FUDGE TO MISS DOROTHY ----.


What a time since I wrote!--I'm a sad, naughty girl--
For, tho' like a tee-totum, I'm all in a twirl;--
Yet even (as you wittily say) a tee-totum
Between all its twirls gives a _letter_ to note 'em.
But, Lord, such a place! and then, DOLLY, my dresses,
My gowns, so divine!--there's no language expresses,
Except just the _two_ words "_superbe_, _magnifique_,"
The trimmings of that which I had home last week!
It is called--I forget--_ la_--something which sounded
Like _alicampane_--but in truth I'm confounded
And bothered, my dear, 'twixt that troublesome boy's
(BOB'S) cookery language, and Madame LE ROI'S:
What with fillets of roses, and fillets of veal,
Things _garni_ with lace, and things _garni_ with eel,
One's hair and one's cutlets both _en papillote_,
And a thousand more things I shall ne'er have by rote,
I can scarce tell the difference, at least as to phrase,
Between beef _ la Psyche_ and curls _ la braise_.--
But in short, dear, I'm trickt out quite _ la Francaise_,
With my bonnet--so beautiful!--high up and poking,
Like things that are put to keep chimneys from smoking.

Where _shall_ I begin with the endless delights
Of this Eden of milliners, monkeys and sights--
This dear busy place, where there's nothing transacting
But dressing and dinnering, dancing and acting?
Imprimis, the Opera--mercy, my ears!
  Brother BOBBY'S remark, t'other night, was a true one:--
"This _must_ be the music," said he, "of the _spears_,
  For I'm curst if each note of it doesnt run thro' one!"
Pa says (and you know, love, his Book's to make out
'Twas the Jacobins brought every mischief about)
That this passion for roaring has come in of late,
Since the rabble all tried for a _voice_ in the State.--
What a frightful idea, one's mind to o'erwhelm!
  What a chorus, dear DOLLY, would soon be let loose of it,
If, when of age, every man in the realm
  Had a voice like old LAIS,[1] and chose to make use of it!
No--never was known in this riotous sphere
Such a breach of the peace as their singing, my dear.
So bad too, you'd swear that the God of both arts,
  Of Music and Physic, had taken a frolic
For setting a loud fit of asthma in parts,
  And composing a fine rumbling bass to a cholic!

But, the dancing--_ah parlez-moi_, DOLLY, _de ca_--
There, _indeed_, is a treat that charms all but Papa.
Such beauty--such grace--oh ye sylphs of romance!
  Fly, fly to TITANIA, and ask her if _she_ has
One light-footed nymph in her train, that can dance
  Like divine BIGOTTINI and sweet FANNY BIAS!
FANNY BIAS in FLORA--dear creature!--you'd swear,
  When her delicate feet in the dance twinkle round,
That her steps are of light, that her home is the air,
  And she only _par complaisance_ touches the ground.
And when BIGOTTINI in PSYCHE dishevels
  Her black flowing hair, and by daemons is driven,
Oh! who does not envy those rude little devils,
  That hold her and hug her, and keep her from heaven?
Then, the music--so softly its cadences die,
So divinely--oh, DOLLY! between you and I,
It's as well for my peace that there's nobody nigh
To make love to me then--_you've_ a soul, and can judge
What a crisis 'twould be for your friend BIDDY FUDGE!
  The next place (which BOBBY has near lost his heart in)
They call it the Play-house--I think--of St. Martin;[2]
Quite charming--and _very_ religious--what folly
To say that the French are not pious, dear DOLLY,
Where here one beholds, so correctly and rightly,
The Testament turned into melodrames nightly;[3]
And doubtless so fond they're of scriptural facts,
They will soon get the Pentateuch up in five acts.
Here DANIEL, in pantomime,[4] bids bold defiance
To NEBUCHADNEZZAR and all his stuft lions,
While pretty young Israelites dance round the Prophet,
In very thin clothing, and _but_ little of it;--
Here BEGRAND,[5] who shines in this scriptural path,
  As the lovely SUSANNA, without even a relic
Of drapery round her, comes out of the bath
  In a manner that, BOB says, is quite _Eve-angelic_!
But in short, dear, 'twould take me a month to recite
All the exquisite places we're at, day and night;
And, besides, ere I finish, I think you'll be glad
Just to hear one delightful adventure I've had.
Last night, at the Beaujon, a place where--I doubt
If its charms I can paint--there are cars, that set out
From a lighted pavilion, high up in the air,
And rattle you down, DOLL--you hardly know where.
These vehicles, mind me, in which you go thro'
This delightfully dangerous journey, hold _two_,
Some cavalier asks, with humility, whether
  You'll venture down _with_ him--you smile--'tis a match;
In an instant you're seated, and down both together
  Go thundering, as if you went post to old scratch![6]
Well, it was but last night, as I stood and remarkt
On the looks and odd ways of the girls who embarkt,
The impatience of some for the perilous flight,
The forced giggle of others, 'twixt pleasure and fright,--
That, there came up--imagine, dear DOLL, if you can--
A fine sallow, sublime, sort of Werterfaced man,
With mustachios that gave (what we read of so oft)
The dear Corsair expression, half savage, half soft,
As Hyenas in love may be fancied to look, or
A something between ABELARD and old BLUCHER!
Up he came, DOLL, to me, and uncovering his head,
(Rather bald, but so warlike!) in bad English said,
"Ah! my dear--if Ma'mselle vil be so very good--
Just for von littel course"--tho' I scarce understood
What he wisht me to do, I said, thank him, I would.
Off we set--and, tho' 'faith, dear, I hardly knew whether
  My head or my heels were the uppermost then,
For 'twas like heaven and earth, DOLLY, coming together,--
  Yet, spite of the danger, we dared it again.
And oh! as I gazed on the features and air
  Of the man, who for me all this peril defied,
I could fancy almost he and I were a pair
  Of unhappy young lovers, who thus, side by side,
Were taking, instead of rope, pistol, or dagger, a
Desperate dash down the falls of Niagara!

This achieved, thro' the gardens we sauntered about,
  Saw the fire-works, exclaimed "_magnifique_!" at each cracker,
And, when 'twas all o'er, the dear man saw us out
  With the air I _will_ say, of a Prince, to our _fiacre_.

Now, hear me--this Stranger,--it may be mere folly--
But _who_ do you think we all think it is, DOLLY?
Why, bless you, no less than the great King of Prussia,
Who's here now incog.[7]--he, who made so much fuss, you
Remember, in London, with BLUCHER and PLATOF,
When SAL was near kissing old BLUCHER'S cravat off!
Pa says he's come here to look after his money,
(Not taking things now as he used under BONEY,)
Which suits with our friend, for BOB saw him, he swore,
Looking sharp to the silver received at the door.
Besides, too, they say that his grief for his Queen
(Which was plain in this sweet fellow's face to be seen)
Requires such a stimulant dose as this car is,
Used three times a day with young ladies in Paris.
Some Doctor, indeed, has declared that such grief
  Should--unless 'twould to utter despairing its folly push--
Fly to the Beaujon, and there seek relief
  By rattling, as BOB says, "like shot thro' a holly-bush."

I must now bid adieu;--only think, DOLLY, think
If this _should_ be the King--I have scarce slept a wink
With imagining how it will sound in the papers,
  And how all the Misses my good luck will grudge,
When they read that Count RUPPIN, to drive away vapors,
  Has gone down the Beaujon with Miss BIDDY FUDGE.

_Nota Bene_.--Papa's almost certain 'tis he--
For he knows the Legitimate cut and could see,
In the way he went poising and managed to tower
So erect in the car, the true _Balance of Power_.


[1] The oldest, most celebrated, and most noisy of the singers at the
French Opera.

[2] The Thtre de la Porte St. Martin which was built when the Opera
House in the Palais Royal was burned down, in 1781.

[3] "The Old Testament," says the theatrical Critic in the _Gazette de
France_, "is a mine of gold for the managers of our small play-houses. A
multitude crowd round the Thtre de la Gaiet every evening to see the
Passage of the Red Sea."

[4] A piece very popular last year, called "_Daniel, ou La Fosse aux
Lions_."

[5] Madame Bgrand, a finely formed woman, who acts in "Susanna and the
Elders,"--"_L'Amour et la Folie_." etc.

[6] According to Dr. Cotterel the cars go at the rate of forty-eight miles
an hour.

[7] His Majesty, who was at Paris under the travelling name of Count
Ruppin, is known to have gone down the Beaujon very frequently.






LETTER VI.

FROM PHIL. FUDGE, ESQ., TO HIS BROTHER
TIM FUDGE, ESQ., BARRISTER AT LAW.


Yours of the 12th received, just now--
  Thanks, for the hint, my trusty brother!
'Tis truly pleasing to see how
  We, FUDGES, stand by one another.
But never fear--I know my chap,
And he knows _me_ too--_verbum sap_,
My Lord and I are kindred spirits,
Like in our ways as two young ferrets;
Both fashioned, as that supple race is,
To twist into all sorts of places;--
Creatures lengthy, lean and hungering,
Fond of blood and _burrow_-mongering.

As to my Book in 91,
  Called "Down with Kings, or, Who'd have thought it?"
Bless you! the Book's long dead and gone,--
  Not even the Attorney-General bought it.
And tho' some few seditious tricks
I played in '95 and '6,
As you remind me in your letter,
His Lordship likes me all the better;--
We proselytes, that come with news full,
Are, as he says, so vastly useful!

REYNOLDS and I--(you know TOM REYNOLDS--
  Drinks his claret, keeps his chaise--
Lucky the dog that first unkennels
  Traitors and Luddites now-a-days;
Or who can help to _bag_ a few,
When SIDMOUTH wants a death, or two;)
REYNOLDS and I and some few more,
  All men like us of _information_,
Friends whom his Lordship keeps in store,
  As _under_-saviors of the nation[1]--
Have, formed a Club this season, where
His Lordship sometimes takes the chair,
And gives us many a bright oration
In praise of our sublime vocation;
Tracing it up to great King MIDAS,
Who, tho' in fable typified as
A royal Ass, by grace, divine
And right of ears, most asinine,
Was yet no more, in fact historical,
  Than an exceeding well-bred tyrant;
And these, his _ears_, but allegorical,
  Meaning Informers, kept at high rent--
Gem'men, who touched the Treasury glisteners,
Like us, for being trusty listeners;
And picking up each tale and fragment,
For royal MIDAS'S Green Bag meant.
"And wherefore," said this best of Peers,
"Should not the REGENT too have ears,
"To reach as far, as long and wide as
"Those of his model, good King MIDAS?"
This speech was thought extremely good,
And (rare for him) was understood--
Instant we drank "The REGENT'S Ears,"
With three times three illustrious cheers,
  Which made the room resound like thunder--
"The REGENT'S Ears, and may he ne'er
"From foolish shame, like MIDAS, wear
  "Old paltry _wigs_ to keep them[2] under!"
This touch at our old friends, the Whigs,
Made us as merry all as grigs.
In short (I'll thank you not to mention
  These things again), we get on gayly;
And thanks to pension and Suspension,
  Our little Club increases daily.
CASTLES, and OLIVER, and such,
Who dont as yet full salary touch,
Nor keep their chaise and pair, nor buy
Houses and lands, like TOM and I,
Of course dont rank with us _salvators_,[3]
But merely serve the Club as waiters,
Like Knights, too, we've our _collar_ days,
(For _us_, I own, an awkward phrase,)
When, in our new costume adorned,--
The REGENT'S buff-and-blue coats _turned_--
We have the honor to give dinners
  To the chief Rats in upper stations:
Your WEMYS, VAUGHANS,--half-fledged sinners,
  Who shame us by their imitations;
Who turn, 'tis true--but what of that?
Give me the useful _peaching_ Rat;
_Not_ things as mute as Punch, when bought,
Whose wooden heads are all they've brought;
Who, false enough to shirk their friends,
  But too faint-hearted to betray,
Are, after all their twists and bends,
  But souls in Limbo, damned half way.
No, no, we nobler vermin are
A _genus_ useful as we're rare;
Midst all the things miraculous
  Of which your natural histories brag,
The rarest must be Rats like us,
  Who _let the cat out of the bag_.
Yet still these Tyros in the cause
Deserve, I own, no small applause;
And they're by us received and treated
With all due honors--only seated
In the inverse scale of their reward,
The merely _promised_ next my Lord;
Small pensions then, and so on, down,
  Rat after rat, they graduate
Thro' job, red ribbon and silk gown,
  To Chancellorship and Marquisate.
This serves to nurse the ratting spirit;
The less the bribe the more the merit.

Our music's good, you may be sure;
My Lord, you know, 's an amateur[4]--
Takes every part with perfect ease,
  Tho' to the Base by nature suited;
And, formed for all, as best may please,
For whips and bolts, or chords and keys,
Turns from his victims to his glees,
  And has them both well _executed_.[5]
HERTFORD, who, tho' no Rat himself,
  Delights in all such liberal arts,
Drinks largely to the House of Guelph,
  And superintends the _Corni_ parts.
While CANNING, who'd be _first_ by choice,
Consents to take an _under_ voice;
And GRAVES,[6] who well that signal knows,
Watches the _Volti Subitos_.[7]

In short, as I've already hinted,
  We take of late prodigiously;
But as our Club is somewhat stinted
  For _Gentlemen_, like TOM and me,
We'll take it kind if you'll provide
A few _Squireens_[8] from t'other side;--
Some of those loyal, cunning elves
  (We often tell the tale with laughter),
Who used to hide the pikes themselves,
  Then hang the fools who found them after.
I doubt not you could find us, too,
Some Orange Parsons that might do:
Among the rest, we've heard of one,
The Reverend--something--HAMILTON,
Who stuft a figure of himself
  (Delicious thought!) and had it shot at,
To bring some Papists to the shelf,
  That couldn't otherwise be got at--
If _he_'ll but join the Association,
We'll vote him in by acclamation.

And now, my brother, guide and friend,
This somewhat tedious scrawl must end.
I've gone into this long detail,
  Because I saw your nerves were shaken
With anxious fears lest I should fail
  In this new, _loyal_, course I've taken.
But, bless your heart! you need not doubt--
We FUDGES know what we're about.
Look round and say if you can see
A much more thriving family.
There's JACK, the Doctor--night and day
  Hundreds of patients so besiege him,
You'd swear that all the rich and gay
  Fell sick on purpose to oblige him.
And while they think, the precious ninnies,
  He's counting o'er their pulse so steady,
The rogue but counts how many guineas
  He's fobbed for that day's work already.
I'll ne'er forget the old maid's alarm,
  When, feeling thus Miss Sukey Flirt, he
Said, as he dropt her shrivelled arm,
  "Damned bad this morning--only thirty!"

Your dowagers, too, every one,
  So generous are, when they call _him_ in,
That he might now retire upon
  The rheumatisms of three old women.
Then whatsoe'er your ailments are,
  He can so learnedly explain ye'em--
Your cold of course is a _catarrh_,
  Your headache is a _hemi-cranium_:--
His skill too in young ladies' lungs,
  The grace with which, most mild of men,
He begs them to put out their tongues.
  Then bids them--put them in again;
In short, there's nothing now like JACK!--
  Take all your doctors great and small,
Of present times and ages back,
  Dear Doctor FUDGE is worth them all.

So much for physic--then, in law too,
  Counsellor TIM, to thee we bow;
Not one of us gives more clat to
  The immortal name of FUDGE than thou.
Not to expatiate on the art
With which you played the patriot's part,
Till something good and snug should offer;--
  Like one, who, by the way he acts
The _enlightening_ part of candle-snuffer,
  The manager's keen eye attracts,
And is promoted thence by him
To strut in robes, like thee, my TIM!--
_Who_ shall describe thy powers of face,
Thy well-fed zeal in every case,
Or wrong or right--but ten times warmer
(As suits thy calling) in the former--
Thy glorious, lawyer-like delight
In puzzling all that's clear and right,
Which, tho' conspicuous in thy youth,
  Improves so with a wig and band on,
That all thy pride's to waylay Truth,
  And leave her not a leg to stand on.
Thy patent prime morality,--
  Thy cases cited from the Bible--
Thy candor when it falls to thee
  To help in trouncing for a libel;--
"God knows, I, from my soul, profess
  "To hate all bigots and be-nighters!
"God knows, I love, to even excess,
"The sacred Freedom of the Press,
  "My only aim's to--crush the writers."
These are the virtues, TIM, that draw
  The briefs into thy bag so fast;
And these, oh TIM--if Law be Law--
  Will raise thee to the Bench at last.

I blush to see this letter's length--
  But 'twas my wish to prove to thee
How full of hope, and wealth, and strength,
  Are all our precious family.
And, should affairs go on as pleasant
As, thank the Fates, they do at present--
Should we but still enjoy the sway
Of SIDMOUTH and of CASTLEREAGH,
I hope, ere long, to see the day
When England's wisest statesmen, judges,
Lawyers, peers, will all be--FUDGES!

Good-by--my paper's out so nearly,
I've room only for
  Yours sincerely.


[1] Lord C.'s tribute to the character of his friend, Mr. Reynolds, will
long be remembered with equal credit to both.

[2] It was not under wigs, but tiaras, that King Midas endeavored to
conceal these appendages. The Noble Giver of the toast, however, had
evidently, with his usual clearness, confounded King Midas, Mr. Liston,
and the Prince Regent together.

[3] Mr. Fudge and his friends ought to go by this name--as the man who,
some years since, saved the late Right Hon. George Rose from drowning, was
ever after called _Salvator Rosa_.

[4] His Lordship, during one of the busiest periods of his Ministerial
career, took lessons three times a week from a celebrated music-master, in
glee-singing.

[5] How amply these two propensities of the Noble Lord would have been
gratified among that ancient people of Etruria, who, as Aristotle tells
us, used to whip their slaves once a year to the sound of flutes!

[6] The rapidity of this Noble Lord's transformation, at the same instant,
into a Lord of the Bed-chamber and an opponent of the Catholic Claims, was
truly miraculous.

[7] _Turn instantly_--a frequent direction in music-books.

[8] The Irish diminutive of _Squire_.






LETTER VII.

FROM PHELIM CONNOR TO--.


Before we sketch the Present--let us cast
A few, short, rapid glances to the Past.

When he, who had defied all Europe's strength,
Beneath his own weak rashness sunk at length;--
When, loosed as if by magic from a chain
That seemed like Fate's the world was free again,
And Europe saw, rejoicing in the sight,
The cause of Kings, _for once_, the cause of Right;--
Then was, indeed, an hour of joy to those
Who sighed for justice--liberty--repose,
And hoped the fall of _one_ great vulture's nest
Would ring its warning round, and scare the rest.
All then was bright with promise;--Kings began
To own a sympathy with suffering Man,
And man was grateful; Patriots of the South
Caught wisdom from a Cossack Emperor's mouth,
And heard, like accents thawed in Northern air,
Unwonted words of freedom burst forth there!

Who did not hope, in that triumphant time,
When monarchs, after years of spoil and crime,
Met round the shrine of Peace, and Heaven lookt on;--
_Who_ did not hope the lust of spoil was gone;
That that rapacious spirit, which had played
The game of Pilnitz o'er so oft, was laid;
And Europe's Rulers, conscious of the past,
Would blush and deviate into right at last?
But no--the hearts, that nurst a hope so fair,
Had yet to learn what men on thrones can dare;
Had yet to know, of all earth's ravening things,
The only _quite_ untameable are Kings!
Scarce had they met when, to its nature true,
The instinct of their race broke out anew;
Promises, treaties, charters, all were vain,
And "Rapine! rapine!" was the cry again.
How quick they carved their victims, and how well,
Let Saxony, let injured Genoa tell;-
Let all the human stock that, day by day,
Was, at that Royal slave-mart, truckt away,--
The million souls that, in the face of heaven,
Were split to fractions, bartered, sold or given
To swell some despot Power, too huge before,
And weigh down Europe with one Mammoth more.
How safe the faith of Kings let France decide;--
Her charter broken, ere its ink had dried;--
Her Press enthralled--her Reason mockt again
With all the monkery it had spurned in vain;
Her crown disgraced by one, who dared to own
He thankt not France but England for his throne;
Her triumphs cast into the shade by those,
Who had grown old among her bitterest foes,
And now returned, beneath her conqueror's shields,
Unblushing slaves! to claim her heroes' fields;
To tread down every trophy of her fame,
And curse that glory which to them was shame!--
Let these--let all the damning deeds, that then
Were dared thro' Europe, cry aloud to men,
With voice like that of crashing ice that rings
Round Alpine huts, the perfidy of Kings;
And tell the world, when hawks shall harmless bear
The shrinking dove, when wolves shall learn to spare
The helpless victim for whose blood they lusted,
Then and then only monarchs may be trusted.

It could not last--these horrors _could_ not last--
France would herself have risen in might to cast
The insulters off--and oh! that then as now,
Chained to some distant islet's rocky brow,
NAPOLEON ne'er had come to force, to blight,
Ere half matured, a cause so proudly bright;--
To palsy patriot arts with doubt and shame,
And write on Freedom's flag a despot's name;--
To rush into the list, unaskt, alone,
And make the stake of _all_ the game of _one_!
Then would the world have seen again what power
A people can put forth in Freedom's hour;
Then would the fire of France once more have blazed;--
For every single sword, reluctant raised
In the stale cause of an oppressive throne,
Millions would then have leaped forth in her own;
And never, never had the unholy stain
Of Bourbon feet disgraced her shores again.

But fate decreed not so--the Imperial Bird,
That, in his neighboring cage, unfeared, unstirred,
Had seemed to sleep with head beneath his wing,
Yet watched the moment for a daring spring;--
Well might he watch, when deeds were done, that made
His own transgressions whiten in their shade;
Well might he hope a world thus trampled o'er
By clumsy tyrants would be his once more:--
Forth from his cage the eagle burst; to light,
From steeple on to steeple[1] winged his flight,
With calm and easy grandeur, to that throne
From which a Royal craven just had flown;
And resting there, as in his eyry, furled
Those wings, whose very rustling shook the world!

  What was your fury then, ye crowned array,
Whose feast of spoil, whose plundering holiday
Was thus broke up, in all its greedy mirth,
By one bold chieftain's stamp on Gallic earth!
Fierce was the cry, and fulminant the ban,--
"Assassinate, who will--enchain, who can,
"The vile, the faithless, outlawed, lowborn man!"
"Faithless!"--and this from _you_--from _you_, forsooth,
Ye pious Kings, pure paragons of truth,
Whose honesty all knew, for all had tried;
Whose true Swiss zeal had served on every side;
Whose fame for breaking faith so long was known,
Well might ye claim the craft as all your own,
And lash your lordly tails and fume to see
Such low-born apes of Royal perfidy!
Yes--yes--to you alone did it belong
To sin for ever, and yet ne'er do wrong,--
The frauds, the lies of Lords legitimate
Are but fine policy, deep strokes of state;
But let some upstart dare to soar so high
In Kingly craft, and "outlaw" is the cry!
What, tho' long years of mutual treachery
Had peopled full your diplomatic shelves
With ghosts of treaties, murdered 'mong yourselves;
Tho' each by turns was knave and dupe--what then?
A holy League would set all straight again;
Like JUNO'S virtue, which a dip or two
In some blest fountain made as good as new!
Most faithful Russia--faithful to whoe'er
Could plunder best and give him amplest share;
Who, even when vanquisht, sure to gain his ends,
For want of _foes_ to rob, made free with _friends_,[2]
And, deepening still by amiable gradations,
When foes were stript of all, then fleeced relations![3]
Most mild and saintly Prussia--steeped to the ears
In persecuted Poland's blood and tears,
And now, with all her harpy wings outspread
O'er severed Saxony's devoted head!
Pure Austria too--whose history naught repeats
But broken leagues and subsidized defeats;
Whose faith, as Prince, extinguisht Venice shows,
Whose faith, as man, a widowed daughter knows!
And thou, oh England--who, tho' once as shy
As cloistered maids, of shame or perfidy,
Art now _broke in_, and, thanks to CASTLEREAGH,
In all that's worst and falsest lead'st the way!

Such was the pure divan, whose pens and wits
The escape from Elba frightened into fits;--
Such were the saints, who doomed NAPOLEON'S life,
In virtuous frenzy, to the assassin's knife.
Disgusting crew!--_who_ would not gladly fly
To open, downright, bold-faced tyranny,
To honest guilt, that dares do all but lie,
From the false, juggling craft of men like these,
Their canting crimes and varnisht villanies;--
These Holy Leaguers, who then loudest boast
Of faith and honor, when they've stained them most;
From whose affection men should shrink as loath
As from their hate, for they'll be fleeced by both;
Who, even while plundering, forge Religion's name
To frank their spoil, and without fear or shame
Call down the Holy Trinity[4] to bless
Partition leagues and deeds of devilishness!
But hold--enough--soon would this swell of rage
O'erflow the boundaries of my scanty page;--
So, here I pause--farewell--another day,
Return we to those Lords of prayer and prey,
Whose loathsome cant, whose frauds by right divine,
Deserve a lash--oh! weightier far than mine!


[1] Napoleon's Proclamation on landing from Elba.

[2] At the Peace of Tilsit, where he abandoned his ally, Prussia, to
France, and received a portion of her territory.

[3] The seizure of Finland from his relative of Sweden.

[4] The usual preamble of these flagitious compacts. In the same spirit,
Catherine, after the dreadful massacre of Warsaw, ordered a solemn
"thanksgiving to God in all the churches, for the blessings conferred upon
the Poles"; and commanded that each of them should "swear fidelity and
loyalty to her, and to shed in her defence the last drop of their blood,
as they should answer for it to God, and his terrible judgment, kissing
the holy word and cross of their Saviour!"






LETTER VIII.

FROM MR. BOB FUDGE TO RICHARD ----, ESQ.


Dear DICK, while old DONALDSON'S[1] mending my stays,--
Which I _knew_ would go smash with me one of these days,
And, at yesterday's dinner, when, full to the throttle,
We lads had begun our dessert with a bottle
Of neat old Constantia, on _my_ leaning back
Just to order another, by Jove, I went crack!--
Or, as honest TOM said, in his nautical phrase,
"Damn my eyes, BOB, in _doubling_ the _Cape_ you've _missed
  stays_."[2]
So, of course, as no gentleman's seen out without them,
They're now at the _Schneider's_[3]--and, while he's about them,
Here goes for a letter, post-haste, neck and crop.
Let us see--in my last I was--where did I stop?
Oh! I know--at the Boulevards, as motley a road as
  Man ever would wish a day's lounging upon;
With its cafs and gardens, hotels and pagodas,
  Its founts and old Counts sipping beer in the sun:
With its houses of all architectures you please,
From the Grecian and Gothic, DICK, down by degrees
To the pure Hottentot or the Brighton Chinese;
Where in temples antique you may breakfast or dinner it,
Lunch at a mosque and see Punch from a minaret.
Then, DICK, the mixture of bonnets and bowers.
Of foliage and frippery, _fiacres_ and flowers,
Green-grocers, green gardens--one hardly knows whether
'Tis country or town, they're so messed up together!
And there, if one loves the romantic, one sees
Jew clothes-men, like shepherds, reclined under trees;
Or Quidnuncs, on Sunday, just fresh from the barber's,
Enjoying their news and _groseille_[4] in those arbors;
While gayly their wigs, like the tendrils, are curling,
And founts of red currant-juice[5] round them are purling.

Here, DICK, arm in arm as we chattering stray,
And receive a few civil "Goddems" by the way,--
For, 'tis odd, these mounseers,--tho' we've wasted our wealth
  And our strength, till we've thrown ourselves into a phthisic;--
To cram down their throats an old King for their health.
  As we whip little children to make them take physic;--
Yet, spite of our good-natured money and slaughter,
They hate us, as Beelzebub hates holy-water!
But who the deuce cares, DICK, as long as they nourish us
Neatly as now, and good cookery flourishes--
Long as, by bayonets protected, we Natties
May have our full fling at their _salmis_ and _pts_?
And, truly, I always declared 'twould be pity
To burn to the ground such a choice-feeding city.
Had _Dad_  but his way, he'd have long ago blown
The whole batch to old Nick--and the _people_, I own,
If for no other cause than their curst monkey looks,
Well deserve a blow-up--but then, damn it, their Cooks!
As to Marshals, and Statesmen, and all their whole lineage,
For aught that _I_ care, you may knock them to spinage;
But think, DICK, their Cooks--what a loss to mankind!
What a void in the world would their art leave behind!
Their chronometer spits--their intense salamanders--
Their ovens--their pots, that can soften old ganders,
All vanisht for ever,--their miracles o'er,
And the _Marmite Perptuelle_ bubbling no more!
Forbid it, forbid it, ye Holy Allies!
  Take whatever ye fancy--take statues, take money--
But leave them, oh leave them, their Perigueux pies,
  Their glorious goose-livers and high pickled tunny!
Tho' many, I own, are the evils they've brought us,
  Tho' Royalty's here on her very last legs,
Yet who can help loving the land that has taught us
  Six hundred and eighty-five ways to dress eggs?

You see, DICK, in spite of them cries of "God-dam,"
_"Coquin Anglais," et cetera_--how generous I am!
And now (to return, once again, to my "Day,"
Which will take us all night to get  thro' in this way.)
From the Boulevards we saunter thro' many a street,
Crack jokes on the natives--mine, all very neat--
Leave the Signs of the Times to political fops,
And find _twice_ as much fun in the Signs of the Shops;--
_Here_, a Louis Dix-huit--_there_, a Martinmas goose,
(Much in vogue since your eagles are gone out of use)--
Henri Quatres in shoals, and of Gods a great many,
But Saints are the most on hard duty of any:--
St. TONY, who used all temptations to spurn,
_Here_ hangs o'er a beer-shop, and tempts in his turn;
While _there_ St. VENECIA[6] sits hemming and frilling her
Holy _mouchoir_ o'er the door of some milliner;--
Saint AUSTIN'S the "outward and visible sign
"Of an inward" cheap dinner, and pint of small wine;
While St. DENYS hangs out o'er some hatter of _ton_,
And possessing, good bishop, no head of his own,[7]
Takes an interest in Dandies, who've got--next to none!
Then we stare into shops--read the evening's _affiches_--
Or, if some, who're Lotharios in feeding, should wish
Just to flirt with a luncheon, (a devilish bad trick,
As it takes off the bloom of one's appetite, DICK.)
To the _Passage des_--what d'ye call't--_des Panoramas_[8]
We quicken our pace, and there heartily cram as
Seducing young _pts_, as ever could cozen
One out of one's appetite, down by the dozen.
We vary, of course--_petits pts_ do _one_ day,
The _next_ we've our lunch with the Gauffrier Hollandais,[9]
That popular artist, who brings out, like SCOTT,
His delightful productions so quick, hot and hot;
Not the worse for the exquisite comment that follows,--
Divine _maresquino_, which--Lord, how one swallows!
Once more, then, we saunter forth after our snack, or
Subscribe a few francs for the price of a _fiacre_,
And drive far away to the old _Montagnes Russes_,
Where we find a few twirls in the car of much use
To regenerate the hunger and thirst of us sinners,
Who've lapst into snacks--the perdition of dinners.
And here, DICK--in answer to one of your queries,
  About which we Gourmands have had much discussion--
I've tried all these mountains, Swiss, French, and Ruggieri's,
  And think, for _digestion_,[10] there's none like the Russian;
So equal the motion--so gentle, tho' fleet--
  It in short such a light and salubrious scamper is,
That take whom you please--take old Louis DIX-HUIT,
  And stuff him--ay, up to the neck--with stewed lampreys,[11]
So wholesome these Mounts, such a _solvent_ I've found them,
That, let me but rattle the Monarch well down them,
The fiend, Indigestion, would fly far away,
And the regicide lampreys[12] be foiled of their prey!
Such, DICK, are the classical sports that content us,
Till five o'clock brings on that hour so momentous,
That epoch--but whoa! my lad--here comes the _Schneider_,
And, curse him, has made the stays three inches wider--
Too wide by an inch and a half--what a Guy!
But, no matter--'twill all be set right by-and-by.
As we've MASSINOT's[13] eloquent _carte_ to eat still up.
An inch and a half's but a trifle to fill up.
So--not to lose time, DICK--here goes for the task;
_Au revoir_, my old boy--of the Gods I but ask
That my life, like "the Leap of the German," may be,
_"Du lit  la table, d'la table du lit!"_

R. F.


[1] An English tailor at Paris.

[2] A ship is said to miss stays, when she does not obey the helm in
tacking.

[3] The dandy term for a tailor.

[4] "Lemonade and _eau-de-groseille_ are measured out at every corner
of every street, from fantastic vessels, jingling with bells, to thirsty
tradesmen or wearied messengers."--See Lady Morgan's lively description of
the streets of Paris, in her very amusing work upon France, book vi.

[5] These gay, portable fountains, from which the groseille water is
administered, are among the most characteristic ornaments of the streets
of Paris.

[6] Veronica, the Saint of the Holy Handkerchief, is also, under the name
of Venisse or Venecia, the tutelary saint of milliners.

[7] St. Denys walked three miles after his head was cut off.

[8] Off the Boulevards Italiens.

[9] In the Palais Royal; successor, I believe, to the Flamaud, so long
celebrated for the _molleux_ of his Gaufres.

[10] Doctor Cotterel recommends, for this purpose, the Beaujon or French
Mountains.

[11] A dish so indigestible that a late novelist at the end of his book,
could imagine no more summary mode of getting rid of all his heroes and
heroines than by a hearty supper of stewed lampreys.

[12] They killed Henry I. of England:-"a food [says Hume, gravely], which
always agreed better with his palate than his constitution."

[13] A famous Restaurateur--now Dupont.






LETTER IX.

PROM PHIL. FUDGE, ESQ., TO
THE LORD VISCOUNT CASTLEREAGH.


My Lord, the Instructions, brought to-day,
"I shall in all my best obey."
Your Lordship talks and writes so sensibly!
And--whatsoe'er some wags may say--
Oh! not at _all_ incomprehensibly.

I feel the inquiries in your letter
  About my health and French most flattering;
Thank ye, my French, tho' somewhat better,
  Is, on the whole, but weak and smattering:--
Nothing, of course, that can compare
With his who made the Congress stare
(A certain Lord we need not name),
  Who, even in French, would have his trope,
And talk of "_batir_ un systme
  "Sur _l'quilibre_ de l'Europe!"
Sweet metaphor!--and then the Epistle,
Which bid the Saxon King go whistle,--
That tender letter to _"Mon Prince"_[1]
Which showed alike thy French and sense;--
Oh no, my Lord--there's none can do
Or say _un-English_ things like you:
And, if the schemes that fill thy breast
  Could but a vent congenial seek,
And use the tongue that suits them best,
  What charming Turkish wouldst thou speak!
But as for _me_, a Frenchless grub,
  At Congress never born to stammer,
Nor learn like thee, my Lord, to snub
  Fallen Monarchs, out of CHAMBAUD'S grammar--
Bless you, you do not, _can not_, know
How far a little French will go;
For all one's stock, one need but draw
  On some half-dozen words like toese--
_Comme a--par-l--l-bas--ah ha_!
  They'll take you all thro' France with ease.
Your Lordship's praises of the scraps
  I sent you from my Journal lately,
(Enveloping a few laced caps
  For Lady C,) delight me greatly.
_Her_ flattering speech--"What pretty things
  "One finds in Mr. FUDGE's pages!"
Is praise which (as some poet sings)
  Would pay one for the toils of ages.

Thus flattered, I presume to send
A few more extracts by a friend;
And I should hope they'll be no less
Approved of than my last MS.--
The former ones, I fear, were creased,
  As BIDDY round the caps _would_ pin them;
But these will come to hand, at least
  Unrumpled, for there's--nothing in them.

_Extracts from Mr. Fudge's Journal, addressed to Lord C._

_August 10_.

Went to the Mad-house--saw the man[2]
  Who thinks, poor wretch, that, while the Fiend
Of Discord here full riot ran,
  _He_, like the rest, was guillotined;--
But that when, under BONEY'S reign,
  (A more discreet, tho' quite as strong one,)
The heads were all restored again,
  He, in the scramble, got a _wrong one_.
Accordingly, he still cries out
  This strange head fits him most unpleasantly;
And always runs, poor devil, about,
Inquiring for his own incessantly!

While to his case a tear I dropt,
  And sauntered home, thought I--ye Gods!
How many heads might thus be swopt,
  And, after all, not make much odds!
For instance, there's VANSITTART'S head--
("Tam _carum_" it may well be said)
If by some curious chance it came
  To settle on BILL SOAMES'S[3] shoulders,
The effect would turn out much the same
  On all respectable cash-holders;
Except that while, in its _new_ socket,
  The head was planning schemes to win
A _zig-zag_ way into one's pocket,
  The hands would plunge directly in.

Good Viscount SIDMOUTH, too, instead
Of his own grave, respected head,
Might wear (for aught I see that bars)
  Old Lady WILHELMINA FRUMP'S--
So while the hand signed _Circulars_,
  The head might lisp out "What is trumps?"--
The REGENT'S brains could we transfer
To some robust man-milliner,
The shop, the shears, the lace, and ribbon
Would go, I doubt not, quite as glib on;
And, _vice versa_, take the pains
To give the PRINCE the shopman's brains,
One only change from thence would flow,
_Ribbons_ would not be wasted so.

'Twas thus I pondered on, my Lord;
  And, even at night, when laid in bed,
I found myself, before I snored,
  Thus chopping, swopping head for head.
At length I thought, fantastic elf!
How such a change would suit _myself_.
'Twixt sleep and waking, one by one,
  With various pericraniums saddled,
At last I tried your Lordship's on,
  And then I grew completely addled--
Forgot all other heads, od rot 'em!
And slept, and dreamt that I was--BOTTOM.

_August 21_.

Walked out with daughter BID--was shown
The House of Commons and the Throne,
Whose velvet cushion's just the same
NAPOLEON sat on--what a shame!
Oh! can we wonder, best of speechers,
  When LOUIS seated thus we see,
That France's "fundamental features"
  Are much the same they used to be?
However,--God preserve the Throne,
  And _cushion_ too--and keep them free;
From accidents, which _have_ been known
  To happen even to Royalty![4]

_August 28_.

Read, at a stall (for oft one pops
On something at these stalls and shops,
That does to _quote_ and gives one's Book
A classical and knowing look.--
Indeed, I've found, in Latin, lately,
A course of stalls improves me greatly)--
'Twas thus I read that in the East
  A monarch's _fat_'s a serious matter;
And once in every year, at least,
  He's weighed--to see if he gets fatter:[5]
Then, if a pound or two he be
Increased, there's quite a jubilee![6]
Suppose, my Lord--and far from me
To treat such things with levity--
But just suppose the Regent's weight
Were made thus an affair of state;
And, every sessions, at the close,--
  'Stead of a speech, which, all can see, is
Heavy and dull enough, God knows--
  We were to try how heavy _he_ is.
Much would it glad all hearts to hear--
  That, while the Nation's Revenue
Loses so many pounds a year,
  The PRINCE, God bless him! _gains_ a few.
With bales of muslin, chintzes, spices,
  I see the Easterns weigh their Kings;--
But, for the REGENT, my advice is,
  We should throw in much _heavier_ things:
For instance-----'s quarto volumes,
  Which, tho' not spices, serve to wrap them;
_Dominie_ STODDART'S Daily columns,
  "Prodigious!"--in, of course, we'd clap them--
Letters, that CARTWRIGHT'S[7] pen indites,
  In which, with logical confusion,
The _Major_ like a _Minor_ writes,
  And never comes to a _Conclusion_:--
Lord SOMERS'S pamphlet--or his head--
(Ah! _that_ were worth its weight in lead!)
Along with which we _in_ may whip, sly,
The Speeches of Sir JOHN COX HIPPISLY;
That Baronet of many words,
Who loves so, in the House of Lords,
To whisper Bishops--and so nigh
  Unto their wigs in whispering goes,
That you may always know him by
  A patch of powder on his nose!--
If this wont do, we in must cram
The "Reasons" of Lord BUCKINGHAM;
(A Book his Lordship means to write,
  Entitled "Reasons for my Ratting":)
Or, should these prove too small and light,
  His rump's a host--we'll bundle _that_ in!
And, _still_ should all these masses fail
To stir the REGENT'S pondrous scale,
Why, then, my Lord, in heaven's name,
  Pitch in, without reserve or stint,
The whole of RAGLEY'S beauteous Dame--
  If _that_ wont raise him, devil's in it!

_August 31_.

Consulted MURPHY'S TACITUS
  About those famous spies at Rome,[8]
Whom certain Whigs--to make a fuss--
Describe as much resembling us,
  Informing gentlemen, at home.
But, bless the fools, they _can't_ be serious,
To say Lord SIDMOUTH'S like TIBERIUS!
What! _he_, the Peer, that injures no man,
Like that severe, blood-thirsty Roman!--
'Tis true, the Tyrant lent an ear to
All sorts of spies--so doth the Peer, too.
'Tis true, my Lord's elect tell fibs,
And deal in perjury--_ditto_ TIB's.
'Tis true, the Tyrant screened and hid
His rogues from justice--_ditto_ SID.
'Tis true the Peer is grave and glib
At moral speeches--_ditto_ TIB.
'Tis true the feats the Tyrant did
Were in his dotage--_ditto_ SID.

So far, I own, the parallel
'Twixt TIB and SIB goes vastly well;
But there are points in TIB that strike
My humble mind as much more like
_Yourself_, my dearest Lord, or him,
Of the India Board--that soul of whim!
Like him, TIBERIUS loved his joke,
  On matters, too, where few can bear one;
_E. g._ a man cut up, or broke
  Upon the wheel--a devilish fair one!
Your common fractures, wounds and fits,
Are nothing to such wholesale wits;
But, let the sufferer gasp for life,
  The joke is then, worth any money;
And, if he writhe beneath a knife,--
  Oh dear, that's something _quite_ too funny.
In this respect, my Lord, you see
The Roman wag and ours agree:
Now as to _your_ resemblance--mum--
  This parallel we need not follow:
Tho' 'tis, in Ireland, said by some
  Your Lordship beats TIBERIUS hollow;
Whips, chains--but these are things too serious
  For me to mention or discuss;
Whene'er your Lordship acts TIBERIUS,
  PHIL. FUDGE'S part is _Tacitus_!

_September 2_.

Was thinking, had Lord SIDMOUTH got
Any good decent sort of Plot
Against the winter-time--if not,
Alas, alas, our ruin's fated;
All done up and _spiflicated_!
Ministers and all their vassals,
Down from CASTLEREAGH to CASTLES,--
Unless we can kick up a riot,
Ne'er can hope for peace or quiet!
What's to be done?--Spa-Fields was clever;
  But even _that_ brought gibes and mockings
Upon our heads--so, _mem._--must never
  Keep ammunition in old stockings;
For fear some wag should in his curst head
Take it to say our force was _worsted.
Mem._ too--when SID an army raises,
It must not be "_incog._" like _Bayes's_:
Nor must the General be a hobbling
Professor of the art of cobbling;
Lest men, who perpetrate such puns,
Should say, with Jacobinic grin,
He felt, from _soleing Wellingtons_,[9]
  A _Wellington's_ great _soul_ within!
Nor must an old Apothecary
  Go take the Tower, for lack of pence,
With (what these wags would call, so merry,)
  _Physical_ force and _phial_-ence!
No--no--our Plot, my Lord, must be
Next time contrived more skilfully.
John Bull, I grieve to say, is growing
So troublesomely sharp and knowing,
So wise--in short, so Jacobin--
'Tis monstrous hard to _take him in_.

_September 6_.

Heard of the fate of our Ambassador
  In China, and was sorely nettled;
But think, my Lord, we should not pass it o'er
  Till all this matter's fairly settled;
And here's the mode occurs to _me_:--
As none of our Nobility,
Tho' for their _own_ most gracious King
(They would kiss hands, or--anything),
Can be persuaded to go thro'
This farce-like trick of the _Ko-tou_;
And as these Mandarins _won't_ bend,
  Without some mumming exhibition,
Suppose, my Lord, you were to send
  GRIMALDI to them on a mission:
As _Legate_, JOE could play his part,
And if, in diplomatic art,
The "_volto sciolto_"'s meritorius,[10]
Let JOE but grin, he has it, glorious!

A _title_ for him's easily made;
  And, by the by, one Christmas time,
If I remember right, he played
  Lord MORLEY in some pantomime:--[1]
As Earl of Morley then gazette him,
If _t'other_ Earl of MORLEY'll let him,
(And why should not the world be blest
"With _two_ such stars, for East and West?)
Then, when before the Yellow Screen
  He's brought--and, sure, the very essence
Of etiquette would be that scene
  Of JOE in the Celestial Presence!--

He thus should say:--"Duke Ho and Soo,
"I'll play what tricks you please for you,
"If you'll, in turn, but do for me
"A few small tricks you now shall see.
"If I consult _your_ Emperor's liking,
"At least you'll do the same for _my_ King."

He then should give them nine such grins,
As would astound even Mandarins;
And throw such somersets before
  The picture of King GEORGE (God bless him!)
As, should Duke Ho but try them o'er,
  Would, by CONFUCIUS, _much_ distress him!

I start this merely as a hint,
But think you'll find some wisdom in't;
And, should you follow up the job,
My son, my Lord (you _know_ poor BOB),
Would in the suite be glad to go
And help his Excellency, JOE:--
At least, like noble AMHERST'S son,
The lad will do to _practise_ on.


[1] The celebrated letter to Prince Hardenburgh (written, however, I
believe, originally in English) in which his Lordship, professing to see
"no moral or political objection" to the dismemberment of Saxony,
denounced the unfortunate King as "not only the most devoted, but the most
favored, of Bonaparte's vassals".

[2] This extraordinary madman is, I believe, in the Bictre. He imagines,
exactly as Mr. Fudge states it, that when the heads of those who had been
guillotined were restored, he by mistake got some other person's instead
of his own.

[3] A celebrated pickpocket.

[4] I am afraid that Mr. Fudge alludes here to a very awkward accident,
which is well known to have happened to poor Louis le Dsir, some years
since, at one of the Regent's Ftes. He was sitting next our gracious
Queen at the time.

[5] "The third day of the Feast the King causeth himself to be weighed
with great care,"--_F. Bernier's "Voyage to Surat," etc_.

[6] "I remember," says Bernier, "that all the Omrahs expressed great joy
that the King weighed two pounds more now than the year preceding."--
Another author tells us that "Fatness, as well as a very large head, is
considered, throughout India, as one of the most precious gifts of
heaven." An enormous skull is absolutely revered, and the happy owner is
looked up to as a superior being. To a _Prince_ a joulter head is
invaluable."--_Oriental Field Sports_.

[7] Major Cartwright.

[8] The name of the first worthy who set up the trade of informer at Rome
(to whom our Olivers and Castleses ought to erect a statue) was Romanus
Hispo.

[9] Short boots so called.

[10] The _open countenance_, recommended by Lord Chesterfield.

[11] Mr. Fudge is a little mistaken here. It was _not_ Grimaldi, but some
very inferior performer, who played this part of "Lord Morley" in the
Pantomime,--so much to the horror of the distinguished Earl of that name.






LETTER X.

FROM MISS BIDDY FUDGE TO MISS DOROTHY ----.


Well, it _isn't_ the King, after all, my dear creature!
  But _don't_ you go laugh, now--there's nothing to quiz in't--
For grandeur of air and for grimness of feature,
  He _might_ be a King, DOLL, tho', hang him, he isn't.
At first, I felt hurt, for I wisht it, I own,
If for no other cause but to vex Miss MALONE,--
(The great heiress, you know, of Shandangan, who's here,
Showing off with _such_ airs, and a real Cashmere,
While mine's but a paltry, old rabbit-skin, dear!)
But Pa says, on deeply considering the thing,
"I am just as well pleased it should _not_ be the King;
"As I think for my BIDDY, so _gentille_ and _jolie_.
  "Whose charms may their price in an _honest_ way fetch,
"That a Brandenburgh"--(what _is_ a Brandenburgh, DOLLY?)--
  "Would be, after all, no such very great catch.
"If the REGENT indeed"--added he, looking sly--
(You remember that comical squint of his eye)
But I stopt him with "La, Pa, how _can_ you say so,
"When the REGENT loves none but old women, you know!"
Which is fact, my dear DOLLY--we, girls of eighteen,
And so slim--Lord, he'd think us not fit to be seen:
And would like us much better as old-as, as old
As that Countess of DESMOND, of whom I've been told
That she lived to much more than a hundred and ten,
And was killed by a fall from a cherry-tree then!
What a frisky old girl! but--to come to my lover,
Who, tho' not a King, is a _hero_ I'll swear,--
You shall hear all that's happened, just briefly run over,
Since that happy night, when we whiskt thro' the air!

Let me see--'twas on Saturday--yes, DOLLY, yes--
From that evening I date the first dawn of my bliss;
When we both rattled off in that dear little carriage,
Whose journey, BOB says, is so like Love and Marriage,
"Beginning gay, desperate, dashing, down-hilly,
"And ending as dull as a six-inside Dilly!"[1]
Well, scarcely a wink did I sleep the night thro';
And, next day, having scribbled my letter to you,
With a heart full of hope this sweet fellow to meet,
I set out with Papa, to see Louis DIX-HUIT
Make his bow to some half-dozen women and boys,
Who get up a small concert of shrill _Vive le Rois_-
And how vastly genteeler, my dear, even this is,
Than vulgar Pall-Mall's oratorio of hisses!
The gardens seemed full--so, of Course, we walkt o'er 'em,
'Mong orange-trees, clipt into town-bred decorum,
And daphnes and vases and many a statue
There staring, with not even a stitch on them, at you!
The ponds, too, we viewed--stood awhile on the brink
To contemplate the play of those pretty gold fishes--
"_Live bullion_," says merciless BOB, "which, I think,
"Would, if _coined_, with a little _mint_ sauce, be delicious!"

But _what_, DOLLY, what, is the gay orange-grove,
Or gold fishes, to her that's in search of her love?
In vain did I wildly explore every chair
Where a thing _like_ a man was--no lover sat there!
In vain my fond eyes did I eagerly cast
At the whiskers, mustachios and wigs that went past,
To obtain if I could but a glance at that curl,--
A glimpse of those whiskers, as sacred, my girl,
As the lock that, Pa says,[2]is to Mussulman given,
For the angel to hold by that "lugs them to heaven!"
Alas, there went by me full many a quiz,
And mustachios in plenty, but nothing like his!
Disappointed, I found myself sighing out "well-a-day,"--
Thought of the words of TOM MOORE'S Irish Melody,
Something about the "green spot of delight"
(Which, you know, Captain MACKINTOSH sung to us one day):
Ah DOLLY, _my_ "spot" was that Saturday night,
And its verdure, how fleeting, had withered by Sunday!
We dined at a tavern--La, what do I say?

  If BOB was to know!--a _Restaurateur's_, dear;
Where your _properest_ ladies go dine every day,
  And drink Burgundy out of large tumblers, like beer.
Fine BOB (for he's really grown _super_-fine)
  Condescended for once to make one of the party;
Of course, tho' but three, we had dinner for nine,
  And in spite of my grief, love, I own I ate hearty.
Indeed, DOLL, I know not how 'tis, but, in grief,
I have always found eating a wondrous relief;
And BOB, who's in love, said he felt the same, _quite_--
  "My sighs," said he, "ceased with the first glass I drank you;
"The _lamb_ made me tranquil, the _puffs_ made me light,
  "And--now that all's o'er--why, I'm--pretty well, thank you!"

To _my_ great annoyance, we sat rather late;
For BOBBY and Pa had a furious debate
About singing and cookery--BOBBY, of course,
Standing up for the latter Fine Art in full force;
And Pa saying, "God only knows which is worst,
  "The French Singers or Cooks, but I wish us well over it--
"What with old LA'S and VRY, I'm curst
  "If _my_ head or my stomach will ever recover it!"

'Twas dark when we got to the Boulevards to stroll,
  And in vain did I look 'mong the street Macaronis,
When, sudden it struck me--last hope of my soul--
  That some angel might take the dear man to TORTONI'S![3]
We entered--and, scarcely had BOB, with an air,
  For a _grappe  la jardinire_ called to the waiters,
When, oh DOLL! I saw him--my hero was there
  (For I knew his white small-clothes and brown leather gaiters),
A group of fair statues from Greece smiling o'er him,[4]
And lots of red currant-juice sparkling before him!
Oh! DOLLY, these heroes--what creatures they are;
  In the _boudoir_ the same as in fields full of slaughter!
As cool in the Beaujon's precipitous car,
  As when safe at TORTONI'S, o'er iced currant water!
He joined us--imagine, dear creature, my ecstasy--
Joined by the man I'd have broken ten necks to see!
BOB wished to treat him with Punch _ la glace_,
But the sweet fellow swore that my _beaute_, my _grce_,
And my _ja-ne-sais-quoi_ (then his whiskers he twirled)
Were to him, "on de top of all Ponch in de vorld."--
How pretty!--tho' oft (as of course it must be)
Both his French and his English are Greek, DOLL, to me.
But, in short, I felt happy as ever fond heart did;
And happier still, when 'twas fixt, ere we parted,
That, if the next day should be _pastoral_ weather.
We all would set off, in French buggies, _together_,
To see _Montmorency_--that place which, you know,
Is so famous for cherries and JEAN JACQUES ROUSSEAU.
His card then he gave us--the _name_, rather creased--
But 'twas CALICOT--something--a Colonel, at least!

After which--sure there never was hero so civil--he
Saw us safe home to our door in _Rue Rivoli_,
Where his _last_ words, as, at parting, he threw
A soft look o'er his shoulders, were--"How do you do!"
But, lord!--there's Papa for the post--I'm so vext--
_Montmorency_ must now, love, be kept for my next.
That dear Sunday night--I was charmingly drest,
And--_so_ providential!--was looking my best;
Such a sweet muslin gown, with a flounce--and my frills,
You've no notion how rich--(tho' Pa has by the bills)
And you'd smile had you seen, when we sat rather near,
Colonel CALICOT eyeing the cambric, my dear.
Then the flowers in my bonnet--but, la! it's in vain--
So, good-by, my sweet DOLL--I shall soon write again.

B. F.

_Nota bene_--our love to all neighbors about--
Your Papa in particular--how is his gout?

P.S.--I've just opened my letter to say,
In your next you must tell me, (now _do_, DOLLY, pray,
For I hate to ask BOB, he's so ready to quiz,)
What sort of a thing, dear, a _Brandenburgh_ is.


[1] The cars, on return, are dragged up slowly by a chain.

[2] For this scrap of knowledge "Pa" was, I suspect, indebted to a note
upon Volney's "Ruins:"

"It is by this tuft of hair (on the crown of the head), worn by the
majority of Mussulmans, that the Angel of the Tomb is to take the elect
and carry them to Paradise."

[3] A fashionable _caf glacier_ on the Italian Boulevards.

[4] "You eat your ice at Tortoni's," says Mr. Scott, "under a Grecian
group."






LETTER XI.

FROM PHELIM CONNOR TO ----.


Yes, 'twas a cause, as noble and as great
As ever hero died to vindicate--
A Nation's right to speak a Nation's voice,
And own no power but of the Nation's choice!
Such was the grand, the glorious cause that now
Hung trembling on NAPOLEON'S single brow;
Such the sublime arbitrament, that poured,
In patriot eyes, a light around his sword,
A hallowing light, which never, since the day
Of his young victories, had illumed its way!

Oh 'twas not then the time for tame debates,
Ye men of Gaul, when chains were at your gates;
When he, who late had fled your Chieftain's eye.
As geese from eagles on Mount Taurus fly,[1]
Denounced against the land, that spurned his chain,
Myriads of swords to bind it fast again--
Myriads of fierce invading swords, to track
Thro' your best blood his path of vengeance back;
When Europe's Kings, that never yet combined
But (like those upper Stars, that, when conjoined,
Shed war and pestilence,) to scourge mankind,
Gathered around, with hosts from every shore,
Hating NAPOLEON much, but Freedom more,
And, in that coming strife, appalled to see
The world yet left one chance for liberty!--
No, 'twas not _then_ the time to weave a net
Of bondage round your Chief; to curb and fret
Your veteran war-horse, pawing for the fight,
When every hope was in his speed and might--
To waste the hour of action in dispute,
And coolly plan how freedom's _boughs_ should shoot,
When your Invader's axe was at the _root_!
No sacred Liberty! that God, who throws,
Thy light around, like His own sunshine, knows
How well I love thee and how deeply hate
_All_ tyrants, upstart and Legitimate--
Yet, in that hour, were France my native land,
I would have followed, with quick heart and hand,
NAPOLEON, NERO--ay, no matter whom--
To snatch my country from that damning doom,
That deadliest curse that on the conquered waits--
A Conqueror's satrap, throned within her gates!

True, he was false--despotic--all you please--
Had trampled down man's holiest liberties--
Had, by a genius, formed for nobler things
Than lie within the grasp of _vulgar_ Kings,
But raised the hopes of men--as eaglets fly
With tortoises aloft into the sky--
To dash them down again more shatteringly!
All this I own--but still

       *        *        *        *        *


[1] See Aellan, _lib_. v. _cap_. 29.,--who tells us that these
geese, from a consciousness of their own loquacity, always cross Mount
Taurus with stones in their bills, to prevent any unlucky cackle from
betraying them to the eagles.






LETTER XII.

FROM MISS BIDDY FUDGE TO MISS DOROTHY ----.


At last, DOLLY,--thanks to potent emetic,
Which BOBBY and Pa, grimace sympathetic,
Have swallowed this morning, to balance the bliss,
Of an eel _matelote_ and a _bisque d'crevisses_--
I've a morning at home to myself, and sit down
To describe you our heavenly trip out of town.
How agog you must be for this letter, my dear!
Lady JANE, in the novel, less languisht to hear,
If that elegant cornet she met at Lord NEVILLE'S
Was actually dying with love or--blue devils.
But Love, DOLLY, Love is the theme _I_ pursue;
With Blue Devils, thank heaven, I have nothing to do--
Except, indeed, dear Colonel CALICOT spies
Any imps of that color in _certain_ blue eyes,
Which he stares at till _I_, DOLL, at _his_ do the same;
Then he simpers--I blush--and would often exclaim,
If I knew but the French for it, "Lord, Sir, for shame!"

  Well, the morning was lovely--the trees in full dress
For the happy occasion--the sunshine _express_--
Had we ordered it, dear, of the best poet going,
It scarce could be furnisht more golden and glowing.
Tho' late when we started, the scent of the air
Was like GATTIE'S rose-water,--and, bright, here and there,
On the grass an odd dew-drop was glittering yet,
Like my aunt's diamond pin on her green tabbinet!
While the birds seemed to warble as blest on the boughs,
As if _each_ a plumed Calicot had for her spouse;
And the grapes were all blushing and kissing in rows,
And--in short, need I tell you wherever one goes
With the creature one loves, 'tis _couleur de rose_;
And ah! I shall ne'er, lived I ever so long, see
A day such as that at divine Montmorency!

There was but _one_ drawback--at first when we started,
The Colonel and I were inhumanly parted;
How cruel--young hearts of such moments to rob!
He went in Pa's buggy, and I went with BOB:
And, I own, I felt spitefully happy to know
That Papa and his comrade agreed but so-so.
For the Colonel, it seems, is a stickler of BONEY'S--
Served _with_ him of course--nay, I'm sure they were cronies.
So martial his features! dear DOLL, you can trace
Ulm, Austerlitz, Lodi, as plain in his face
As you do on that pillar of glory and brass,[1]
Which the poor DUC DE BERRI must hate so to pass!
It appears, too, he made--as most foreigners do--
About English affairs an odd blunder or two.
For example misled by the names, I dare say--
He confounded JACK CASTLES with LORD CASTLEREAGH;
And--sure such a blunder no mortal hit ever on--
Fancied the _present_ Lord CAMDEN the _clever_ one!

But politics ne'er were the sweet fellow's trade;
'Twas for war and the ladies my Colonel was made.
And oh! had you heard, as together we walkt
Thro' that beautiful forest, how sweetly he talkt;
And how perfectly well he appeared, DOLL, to know
All the life and adventures of JEAN JACQUES ROUSSEAU?--
"'Twas there," said he--not that his _words_ I can state--
'Twas a gibberish that Cupid alone could translate;--
But "there," said he, (pointing where, small and remote,
The dear Hermitage rose), "there his JULIE he wrote,--
"Upon paper gilt-edged, without blot or erasure;
"Then sauded it over with silver and azure,
"And--oh, what will genius and fancy not do!--
"Tied the leaves up together with _nonpareille_ blue!"
What a trait of Rousseau! what a crowd of emotions
  From sand and blue ribbons are conjured up here!
Alas, that a man of such exquisite notions
Should send his poor brats to the Foundling, my dear!
  "'Twas here too perhaps," Colonel CALICOT said--
As down the small garden he pensively led--
(Tho' once I could see his sublime forehead wrinkle
With rage not to find there the loved periwinkle)
"'Twas here he received from the fair D'PINAY
"(Who called him so sweetly _her Bear_, every day,)
"That dear flannel petticoat, pulled off to form
"A waistcoat, to keep the enthusiast warm!"

Such, DOLL, were the sweet recollections we pondered,
As, full of romance, thro' that valley we wandered.
The flannel (one's train of ideas, how odd it is!)
Led us to talk about other commodities,
Cambric, and silk, and--I ne'er shall forget,
For the sun was then hastening in pomp to its set.

And full on the Colonel's dark whiskers shone down,
When he askt me, with eagerness,--who made my gown?
The question confused me--for, DOLL, you must know,
And I _ought_ to have told my best friend long ago,
That, by Pa's strict command, I no longer employ[2]
That enchanting _couturire_, Madame LE ROI;
But am forced now to have VICTORINE, who--deuce take her!--
It seems is, at present, the King's mantua-maker--
I mean _of his party_--and, tho' much the smartest,
LE ROI is condemned as a rank Bonapartist.[3]
Think, DOLL, how confounded I lookt--so well knowing
The Colonel's opinions--my cheeks were quite glowing;
I stammered out something--nay, even half named
The _legitimate_ sempstress, when, loud, he exclaimed,
"Yes; yes, by the stitching 'tis plain to be seen
"It was made by that Bourbonite bitch, VICTORINE!"
What a word for a hero!--but heroes _will_ err,
And I thought, dear, I'd tell you things _just_ as they were.
Besides tho' the word on good manners intrench,
I assure you 'tis not _half_ so shocking in French.

But this cloud, tho' embarrassing, soon past away,
And the bliss altogether, the dreams of that day,
The thoughts that arise, when such dear fellows woo us,--
The _nothings_ that then, love, are--_everything_ to us--
That quick correspondence of glances and sighs,
And what BOB calls the "Two-penny-post of the Eyes"--
Ah, DOLL! tho' I _know_ you've a heart, 'tis in vain,
To a heart so unpractised these things to explain.
They can only be felt, in their fulness divine,
By her who has wandered, at evening's decline,
Thro' a valley like that, with a Colonel like mine!

But here I must finish--for BOB, my dear DOLLY,
Whom physic, I find, always makes melancholy,
Is seized with a fancy for churchyard reflections;
And, full of all yesterday's rich recollections,
Is just setting off for Montmartre--"for _there_ is,"
Said he, looking solemn, "the tomb of the VRYS![4]
"Long, long have I wisht as a votary true,
  "O'er the grave of such talents to utter my moans;
"And, to-day--as my stomach is not in good cue
  "For the _flesh_ of the VRYS--I'll visit their _bones_!"
He insists upon _my_ going with him--how teasing!
  This letter, however, dear DOLLY, shall lie
Unsealed in my drawer, that, if anything pleasing
  Occurs while I'm out, I may tell you--good-by.

B.F.

_Four o'clock_.

Oh, DOLLY, dear DOLLY, I'm ruined for ever--
I ne'er shall be happy again, DOLLY, never!
To think of the wretch--what a victim was I!
'Tis too much to endure--I shall die, I shall die--
"My brain's in a fever--my pulses beat quick--
I shall die or at least be exceedingly sick!
Oh! what do you think? after all my romancing,
My visions of glory, my sighing, my glancing,
This Colonel--I scarce can commit it to paper--
This Colonel's no more than a vile linen-draper!!
'Tis true as I live--I had coaxt brother BOB so,
(You'll hardly make out what I'm writing, I sob so,)
For some little gift on my birthday--September
The thirtieth, dear, I'm eighteen, you remember--
That BOB to a shop kindly ordered the coach,
  (Ah! little I thought who the shopman would prove,)
To bespeak me a few of those _mouchoirs de poche_,
  Which, in happier hours, I have sighed for, my love--
(The most beautiful things--two Napoleons the price--
And one's name in the corner embroidered so nice!)
Well, with heart full of pleasure, I entered the shop.
But--ye Gods, what a phantom!--I thought I should drop--
There he stood, my dear DOLLY--no room for a doubt--
  There, behind the vile counter, these eyes saw him stand,
With a piece of French cambric, before him rolled out,
  And that horrid yard-measure upraised in his hand!
Oh!--Papa, all along, knew the secret,' is clear--
'Twas _a shopman_ he meant by a "Brandenburgh," dear!
The man, whom I fondly had fancied a King,
  And, when _that_ too delightful illusion was past,
As a hero had worshipt--vile, treacherous thing--
  To turn out but a low linen-draper at last!
My head swam around--the wretch smiled, I believe,
But his smiling, alas, could no longer deceive--
I fell back on BOB--my whole heart seemed to wither--
And, pale as a ghost, I was carried back hither!
I only remember that BOB, as I caught him,
  With cruel facetiousness said, "Curse the Kiddy!
"A stanch Revolutionist always I've thought him,
  "But now I find out he's a _Counter_ one, BIDDY!"

Only think, my dear creature, if this should be known
To that saucy, satirical thing, Miss MALONE!
What a story 'twill be at Shandangan for ever!
  What laughs and what quizzing she'll have with the men!
It will spread thro' the country--and never, oh! never
  Can BIDDY be seen at Kilrandy again!
Farewell--I shall do something desperate, I fear--
And, ah! if my fate ever reaches your ear,
One tear of compassion my DOLL will not grudge
To her poor--broken-hearted--young friend, BIDDY FUDGE.

_Nota bene_--I am sure you will hear, with delight,
That we're going, all three, to see BRUNET to-night.
A laugh will revive me--and kind Mr. COX
(Do you know him?) has got us the Governor's box.


[1] The column in the Place Vendme.

[2] Miss Biddy's notions of French pronunciation may be perceived in the
rhymes which she always selects for "_Le Roi_."

[3] LE ROI, who was the _Couturire_ of the Empress Maria Louisa, is at
present, of course, out of fashion, and is succeeded in her station by the
Royalist mantua-maker, VICTORINE.

[4] It is the _brother_ of the present excellent _Restaurateur_ who lies
entombed so magnificently in the Cimetire Monmartre.








THE FUDGES IN ENGLAND

BEING A SEQUEL TO THE

"FUDGE FAMILY IN PARIS."




PREFACE.


The name of the country town, in England--a well-known fashionable
watering-place--in which the events that gave rise to the following
correspondence occurred, is, for obvious reasons, suppressed. The interest
attached, however, to the facts and personages of the story, renders it
independent of all time and place; and when it is recollected that the
whole train of romantic circumstances so fully unfolded in these Letters
has passed during the short period which has now elapsed since the great
Meetings in Exeter Hall, due credit will, it is hoped, be allowed to the
Editor for the rapidity with which he has brought the details before the
Public; while, at the same time any errors that may have been the result
of such haste will, he trusts, with equal consideration, be pardoned.






THE FUDGES IN ENGLAND






LETTER I.

FROM PATRICK MAGAN, ESQ., TO
THE REV. RICHARD ----; CURATE
OF ----, IN IRELAND.


Who d' ye think we've got here?--quite reformed from the giddy.
  Fantastic young thing that once made such a noise--
Why, the famous Miss Fudge--that delectable Biddy,
  Whom you and I saw once at Paris, when boys,
In the full blaze of bonnets, and ribands, and airs--
  Such a thing as no rainbow hath colors to paint;
Ere time had reduced her to wrinkles and prayers,
  And the Flirt found a decent retreat in the Saint.

Poor "Pa" hath popt off--gone, as charity judges,
To some choice Elysium reserved for the Fudges;
And Miss, with a fortune, besides expectations
From some much revered and much palsied relations,
Now wants but a husband, with requisites meet,--
Age, thirty, or thereabouts--stature six feet,
And warranted godly--to make all complete.
_Nota bene_--a Churchman would suit, if he's _high_,
But Socinians or Catholics need not apply.

What say you, Dick? doesnt this tempt your ambition?
  The whole wealth of Fudge, that renowned man of pith.
All brought to the hammer, for Church competition,--
  Sole encumbrance, Miss Fudge to be taken therewith.
Think, my boy, for a Curate how glorious a catch!
While, instead of the thousands of souls you _now_ watch,
To save Biddy Fudge's is all you need do;
And her purse will meanwhile be the saving of _you_.

You may ask, Dick, how comes it that I, a poor elf,
Wanting substance even more than your spiritual self,
Should thus generously lay my own claims on the shelf,
When, God knows! there ne'er was young gentleman yet
So much lackt an old spinster to rid him from debt,
Or had cogenter reasons than mine to assail her
With tender love-suit--at the suit of his tailor.

But thereby there hangs a soft secret, my friend,
Which thus to your reverend breast I commend:
Miss Fudge hath a niece--such a creature!--with eyes
Like those sparklers that peep out from summer-night skies
At astronomers-royal, and laugh with delight
To see elderly gentlemen spying all night.

While her figure--oh! bring all the gracefullest things
That are borne thro' the light air by feet or by wings,
Not a single new grace to that form could they teach,
Which combines in itself the perfection of each;
While, rapid or slow, as her fairy feet fall,
The mute music of symmetry modulates all.

Ne'er in short was there creature more formed to bewilder
  A gay youth like me, who of castles arial
(And _only_ of such) am, God help me! a builder;
  Still peopling each mansion with lodgers ethereal,
And now, to this nymph of the seraph-like eye,
Letting out, as you see, my first floor next the sky.

But, alas! nothing's perfect on earth--even she,
  This divine little gipsy, does odd things sometimes;
Talks learning--looks wise (rather painful to see),
  Prints already in two County papers her rhymes;
And raves--the sweet, charming, absurd little dear,
About _Amulets, Bijous_, and _Keepsakes_, next year.
In a manner which plainly bad symptoms portends
Of that Annual _blue_ fit, so distressing to friends;
A fit which, tho' lasting but one short edition,
Leaves the patient long after in sad inanition.

However, let's hope for the best--and, meanwhile,
Be it mine still to bask in the niece's warm smile;
While you, if you're wise, Dick, will play the gallant
(Uphill work, I confess,) to her Saint of an Aunt.
Think, my boy, for a youngster like you, who've a lack,
Not indeed of rupees, but of all other specie.

What luck thus to find a kind witch at your back,
  An old goose with gold eggs, from all debts to release ye!
Never mind, tho' the spinster be reverend and thin,
  What are all the Three Graces to her Three per Cents?
While her aeres!--oh Dick, it dont matter one pin
  How she touches the affections, so _you_ touch the rents;
And Love never looks half so pleased as when, bless him, he
Sings to an old lady's purse "Open, Sesame."

By the way, I've just heard, in my walks, a report,
Which, if true, will insure for your visit some sport.
'Tis rumored our Manager means to bespeak
The Church tumblers from Exeter Hall for next week;
And certainly ne'er did a queerer or rummer set
Throw, for the amusement of Christians, a summerset.
'Tis feared their chief "Merriman," C--ke, cannot come,
Being called off, at present, to play Punch at home;
And the loss of so practised a wag in divinity
Will grieve much all lovers of jokes on the Trinity;--
His pun on the name Unigenitus, lately
Having pleased Robert Taylor, the _Reverend_, greatly.
'Twill prove a sad drawback, if absent he be,
As a wag Presbyterian's a thing quite to see;
And, 'mong the Five Points of the Calvinists, none of 'em
Ever yet reckoned a point of wit one of 'em.
But even tho' deprived of this comical elf,
We've a host of _buffoni_ in Murtagh himself.
Who of all the whole troop is chief mummer and mime,
And Coke takes the _Ground_ Tumbling, _he_ the
_Sublime_;[1]
And of him we're quite certain, so pray come in time.


[1] In the language of the play-bills, "Ground and _Lofty_ Tumbling."






LETTER II.

FROM MISS BIDDY FUDGE TO MRS. ELIZABETH ----.


Just in time for the post, dear, and monstrously busy,
  With godly concernments--and worldly ones, too;
Things carnal and spiritual mixt, my dear Lizzy,
In this little brain till, bewildered and dizzy,
  'Twixt heaven and earth, I scarce know what I do.

First, I've been to see all the gay fashions from Town,
Which our favorite Miss Gimp for the spring has had down.
Sleeves _still_ worn (which _I_ think is wise), _ la
folle_,
Charming hats, _pou de soie_--tho' the shape rather droll.
But you cant think how nicely the caps of _tulle_ lace,
With the _mentonnires_ look on this poor sinful face;
And I mean, if the Lord in his mercy thinks right,
To wear one at Mrs. Fitz-wigram's to-night.

The silks are quite heavenly:--I'm glad too to say
Gimp herself grows more godly and good every day;
Hath had sweet experience--yea, even doth begin
To turn from the Gentiles, and put away sin--
And all since her last stock of goods was laid in.
What a blessing one's milliner, careless of pelf,
Should thus "walk in newness," as well as one's self!
So much for the blessings, the comforts of Spirit
I've had since we met, and they're more than I merit!--
Poor, sinful, weak creature in every respect,
Tho' ordained (God knows why) to be one of the Elect.
But now for the picture's reverse.--You remember
That footman and cook-maid I hired last December;
_He_ a Baptist Particular--_she_, of some sect
Not particular, I fancy, in any respect;
But desirous, poor thing, to be fed with the Word,
And "to wait," as she said, "on Miss Fudge and the Lord."

Well, my dear, of all men, that Particular Baptist
At preaching a sermon, off hand, was the aptest;
And, long as he staid, do him justice, more rich in
Sweet savors of doctrine, there never was kitchen.
He preached in the parlor, he preached in the hall,
He preached to the chambermaids, scullions and all.
  All heard with delight his reprovings of sin,
But above all, the cook-maid:--oh, ne'er would she tire--
Tho', in learning to save sinful souls from the fire,
  She would oft let the soles she was frying fall in.
(God forgive me for punning on points thus of piety!--
A sad trick I've learned in Bob's heathen society.)
But ah! there remains still the worst of my tale;
Come, Asterisks, and help me the sad truth to veil--
Conscious stars, that at even your own secret turn pale!
       *        *        *        *        *
       *        *        *        *        *
In short, dear, this preaching and psalm-singing pair,
Chosen "vessels of mercy," as _I_ thought they were,
Have together this last week eloped; making bold
To whip off as much goods as both vessels could hold--
Not forgetting some scores of sweet Tracts from my shelves,
Two Family Bibles as large as themselves,
And besides, from the drawer--I neglecting to lock it--
My neat "Morning Manna, done up for the pocket."[1]
Was there e'er known a case so distressing, dear Liz?
It has made me quite ill:-and the worst of it is,
When rogues are _all_ pious, 'tis hard to detect
_Which_ rogues are the reprobate, _which_ the elect.
This man "had a _call_," he said--impudent mockery!
What call had he to _my_ linen and crockery?

I'm now and have been for this week past in chase
Of some godly young couple this pair to replace.
The enclosed two announcements have just met my eyes
In that venerable Monthly where Saints advertise
For such temporal comforts as this world supplies;
And the fruits of the Spirit are properly made
An essential in every craft, calling and trade.
Where the attorney requires for his 'prentice some youth
Who has "learned to fear God and to walk in the truth;"
Where the sempstress, in search of employment, declares
That pay is no object, so she can have prayers;
And the Establisht Wine Company proudly gives out
That the whole of the firm, Co. and all, are devout.

Happy London, one feels, as one reads o'er the pages,
Where Saints are so much more abundant than sages;
Where Parsons may soon be all laid on the shelf,
As each Cit can cite chapter and verse for himself,
And the _serious_ frequenters of market and dock
All lay in religion as part of their stock.[2]
Who can tell to what lengths we may go on improving,
When thus thro' all London the Spirit keeps moving,
And heaven's so in vogue that each shop adver_tise_ment
Is now not so much for the earth as the skies meant?

P. S.

Have mislaid the two paragraphs--cant stop to look,
But both describe charming--both Footman and Cook.
She, "decidedly pious"--with pathos deplores
The increase of French cookery and sin on our shores;
And adds--(while for further accounts she refers
To a great Gospel preacher, a cousin of hers,)
That "tho' _some_ make their Sabbaths mere matter-of-fun days,
She asks but for tea and the Gospel, on Sundays."
The footman, too, full of the true saving knowledge;--
Has late been to Cambridge--to Trinity College;
Served last a young gentleman, studying divinity,
But left--not approving the morals of Trinity.

P. S.

I enclose, too, according to promise, some scraps
  Of my Journal--that Day-book I keep of my heart;
Where, at some little items, (partaking, perhaps,
  More of earth than of heaven,) thy prudery may start,
  And suspect something tender, sly girl as thou art.
For the present, I'm mute--but, whate'er may befall,
Recollect, dear, (in Hebrews, xiii. 4,) St. Paul
Hath himself declared, "marriage is honorable in all."

EXTRACTS FROM MY DIARY.

_Monday_.

Tried a new chl gown on--pretty.
No one to see me in it--pity!
Flew in a passion with Fritz, my maid;--
The Lord forgive me!--she lookt dismayed;
But got her to sing the 100th Psalm,
While she curled my hair, which made me calm.
Nothing so soothes a Christian heart
As sacred music--heavenly art!

_Tuesday_

At two a visit from Mr. Magan--
A remarkably handsome, nice young man;
And, all Hibernian tho' he be,
As civilized, strange to say, as we!
I own this young man's spiritual state
Hath much engrossed my thoughts of late;
And I mean, as soon as my niece is gone,
To have some talk with him thereupon.
At present I naught can do or say,
But that troublesome child is in the way;
Nor is there, I think, a doubt that he
  Would also her absence much prefer,
As oft, while listening intent to me,
  He's forced, from politeness, to look at her.

Heigho!--what a blessing should Mr. Magan
Turn out, after all, a "renewed" young man;
And to me should fall the task, on earth,
To assist at the dear youth's second birth.
Blest thought! and ah! more blest the tie,
Were it Heaven's high will, that he and I--
But I blush to write the nuptial word--
Should wed, as St. Paul says, "in the Lord";
Not _this_ world's wedlock--gross, gallant,
But pure--as when Amram married his aunt.

Our ages differ--but who would count
One's natural sinful life's amount,
Or look in the Register's vulgar page
For a regular twice-born Christian's age,
Who, blessed privilege! only then
Begins to live when he's born again?
And, counting in _this_ way--let me see--
I myself but five years old shall be.
And dear Magan, when the event takes place,
An actual new-born child of grace--
Should Heaven in mercy so dispose--
A six-foot baby, in _swaddling_ clothes.

_Wednesday_.

Finding myself, by some good fate,
With Mr. Magan left _tte--tte_,
Had just begun--having stirred the fire,
And drawn my chair near his--to inquire,
What his notions were of Original Sin,
When that naughty Fanny again bounced in;
And all the sweet things I had got to say
Of the Flesh and the Devil were whiskt away!

Much grieved to observe that Mr. Magan
Is actually pleased and, amused with Fan!
What charms any sensible man can see
In a child so foolishly young as she--
But just eighteen, come next Mayday,
With eyes, like herself, full of naught but play--
Is, I own, an exceeding puzzle to me.


[1] "Morning Manna, or British Verse-book, neatly done up for the pocket,"
and chiefly intended to assist the members of the British Verse
Association, whose design is, we are told, "to induce the inhabitants of
Great Britain and Ireland to commit one and the same verse of Scripture to
memory every morning. Already, it is known, several thousand persons in
Scotland, besides tens of thousands in America and Africa, _are every
morning learning the same verse_."

[2] According to the late Mr. Irving, there is even a peculiar form of
theology got up expressly for the money-market, "I know how far wide," he
says, "of the mark my views of Christ's work in the flesh will be viewed
by those who are working with the stock-jobbing theology of the religious
world." "Let these preachers." he adds, "(for I will not call them
theologians), cry up, brother like, their article,"--_Morning Watch_."--
No. iii, 442. 443.






LETTER III.

FROM MISS FANNY FUDGE, TO HER COUSIN, MISS KITTY ----.

STANZAS ENCLOSED.


TO MY SHADOW; OR, WHY?--WHAT?--HOW?

Dark comrade of my path! while earth and sky
  Thus wed their charms, in bridal light arrayed,
Why in this bright hour, walkst thou ever nigh;
  Blackening my footsteps, with thy length of shade--
                 Dark comrade, WHY?

Thou mimic Shape that, mid these flowery scenes,
  Glidest beside me o'er each sunny spot,
Saddening them as thou goest--say, what means
  So dark an adjunct to so bright a lot--
                 Grim goblin, WHAT?

Still, as to pluck sweet flowers I bend my brow,
  Thou bendest, too--then risest when I rise;--
Say, mute, mysterious Thing! how is't that thou
  Thus comest between me and those blessed skies--
                   Dim shadow, HOW?

(ADDITIONAL STANZA, BY ANOTHER HAND.)

Thus said I to that Shape, far less in grudge
  Than gloom of soul; while, as I eager cried,
Oh Why? What? How?--a Voice, that one might judge
  To be some Irish echo's, faint replied,
         Oh fudge, fudge, fudge!

You have here, dearest Coz, my last lyric effusion;
  And, with it, that odious "additional stanza,
Which Aunt _will_ insist I must keep, as conclusion,
  And which, you'll _at once_ see, is Mr. Magan's;--a
  Most cruel and dark-designed extravaganza,
And part of that plot in which he and my Aunt are
To stifle the flights of my genius by banter.

Just so 'twas with Byron's young eagle-eyed strain,
Just so did they taunt him;--but vain, critics, vain
All your efforts to saddle Wit's fire with a chain!
To blot out the splendor of Fancy's young stream,
Or crop, in its cradle, her newly-fledged beam!!!
Thou perceivest, dear, that, even while these lines I indite,
Thoughts burn, brilliant fancies break out, wrong or right,
And I'm all over poet, in Criticism's spite!

That my Aunt, who deals only in Psalms, and regards
Messrs. Sternhold and Co. as the first of all bards--
That _she_ should make light of my works I cant blame;
But that nice, handsome, odious Magan--what a shame!
Do you know, dear, that, high as on most points I rate him,
I'm really afraid--after all, I--_must_ hate him,
He is _so_ provoking--naught's safe from his tongue;
He spares no one authoress, ancient or young.
Were you Sappho herself, and in _Keepsake_ or _Bijou_
Once shone as contributor, Lord! how he'd quiz you!
He laughs at _all_ Monthlies--I've actually seen
A sneer on his brow at _The Court Magazine_!--
While of Weeklies, poor things, there's but one he peruses,
And buys every book which that Weekly abuses.
But I care not how others such sarcasm may fear,
_One_ spirit, at least, will not bend to his sneer;
And tho' tried by the fire, my young genius shall burn as
Uninjured as crucified gold in the furnace!
(I suspect the word "crucified" must be made "crucible,"
Before this fine image of mine is producible.)
And now, dear--to tell you a secret which, pray
Only trust to such friends as with safety you may--
You know and indeed the whole country suspects
(Tho' the Editor often my best things rejects),
That the verses signed so,[symbol: hand], which you now and then see
In our County _Gazette_ (vide _last_) are by me.
But 'tis dreadful to think what provoking mistakes
The vile country Press in one's prosody makes.
For you know, dear--I may, without vanity, hint--
Tho' an angel should write, still 'tis _devils_ must print;
And you cant think what havoc these demons sometimes
Choose to make of one's sense, and what's worse, of one's rhymes.
But a week or two since, in my Ode upon Spring,
Which I _meant_ to have made a most beautiful thing,
Where I talkt of the "dewdrops from freshly-blown roses,"
The nasty things made it "from freshly-blown noses!"
And once when to please my cross Aunt, I had tried
To commemorate some saint of her _cligue_, who'd just died,
Having said he "had taken up in heaven his position,"
They made it, he'd "taken up to heaven his physician!"

This is very disheartening;--but brighter days shine,
I rejoice, love, to say both for me and the Nine;
For what do you think?--so delightful! next year,
  Oh, prepare, dearest girl, for the grand news prepare--
I'm to write in "_The Keepsake_"--yes, Kitty, my dear.
  To write in "_The Keepsake_," as sure as you're there!!
T' other night, at a Ball, 'twas my fortunate chance
With a very nice elderly Dandy to dance,
Who, 'twas plain, from some hints which I now and then caught.
Was the author of _something_--one couldnt tell what;
But his satisfied manner left no room to doubt
It was something that Colburn had lately brought out.

We conversed of _belles-lettres_ thro' all the quadrille,--
Of poetry, dancing, of prose, standing still;
Talkt of Intellect's march--whether right 'twas or wrong--
And then settled the point in a bold _en avant_.
In the course of this talk 'twas that, having just hinted
That _I_ too had Poems which--longed to be printed,
He protested, kind man! he had seen, at first sight,
I was actually _born_ in "_The Keepsake_" to write.
"In the Annals of England let some," he said, "shine,
"But a place in her Annuals, Lady, be thine!
"Even now future '_Keepsakes_' seem brightly to rise,
"Thro' the vista of years, as I gaze on those eyes,--
"All lettered and prest, and of large-paper size!"
How un_like_ that Magan, who my genius would smother,
And how we true geniuses find out each other!

This and much more he said with that fine frenzied glance
One so rarely now sees, as we slid thro' the dance;
Till between us 'twas finally fixt that, next year,
  In this exquisite task I my pen should engage;
And, at parting, he stoopt down and lispt in my ear
These mystical words, which I could but _just_ hear,
  "Terms for rhyme--if it's _prime_--ten and sixpence per page."
Think, Kitty, my dear, if I heard his words right,
  What a mint of half-guineas this small head contains;
If for nothing to write is itself a delight,
  Ye Gods, what a bliss to be paid for one's strains!

Having dropt the dear fellow a courtesy profound,
  Off at once, to inquire all about him, I ran;
And from what I could learn, do you know, dear, I've found
  That he's quite a new species of literary man;
One, whose task is--to what will not fashion accustom us?--
To _edit_ live authors, as if they were posthumous.
For instance--the plan, to be sure, is the oddest!--
If any young he or she author feels modest
In venturing abroad, this kind gentleman-usher
Lends promptly a hand to the interesting blusher;
Indites a smooth Preface, brings merit to light,
Which else might, by accident, shrink out of sight,
And, in short, renders readers and critics polite.
My Aunt says--tho' scarce on such points one can credit her--
He was Lady Jane Thingumbob's last novel's editor.
'Tis certain the fashion's but newly invented;
  And quick as the change of all things and all names is,
Who knows but as authors like girls are _presented_,
  We girls may be _edited_ soon at St. James's?

I must now close my letter--there's Aunt, in full screech,
Wants to take me to hear some great Irvingite preach.
God forgive me, I'm not much inclined, I must say,
To go and sit still to be preached at to-day.
And besides--'twill be all against dancing, no doubt,
Which my poor Aunt abhors with such hatred devout,
That so far from presenting young nymphs with a head,
For their skill in the dance, as of Herod is said,
She'd wish their own heads in the platter instead.
There again--coming, Ma'am!--I'll write more, if I can,
Before the post goes,
             Your affectionate Fan.

_Four o'clock_.

Such a sermon!--tho' _not_ about dancing, my dear;
'Twas only on the end of the world being near.
Eighteen Hundred and Forty's the year that some state
As the time for that accident--some Forty Eight[1]
And I own, of the two, I'd prefer much the latter,
As then I shall be an old maid, and 'twon't matter.
Once more, love, good-by--I've to make a new cap;
But am now so dead tired with this horrid mishap
Of the end of the world that I _must_ take a nap.


[1] With regard to the exact time of this event, there appears to be a
difference only of about two or three years among the respective
calculators. M. Alphonse Nicole, Docteur en Droit. et Avocat, merely
doubts whether it is to be in 1846 or 1847.






LETTER IV.

FROM PATRICK MAGAN, ESQ., TO THE REV. RICHARD ----.


He comes from Erin's speechful shore
Like fervid kettle, bubbling o'er
  With hot effusions--hot and weak;
Sound, Humbug, all your hollowest drums,
He comes, of Erin's martyrdoms
  To Britain's well-fed Church to speak.

Puff him, ye Journals of the Lord,[1]
Twin prosers, _Watchman_ and _Record_!
Journals reserved for realms of bliss,
Being much too good to sell in this,
Prepare, ye wealthier Saints, your dinners,
  Ye Spinsters, spread your tea and crumpets;
And you, ye countless Tracts for Sinners,
  Blow all your little penny trumpets.
He comes, the reverend man, to tell
  To all who still the Church's part take,
Tales of parsonic woe, that well
  Might make even grim Dissenter's heart ache:--
Of ten whole bishops snatched away
For ever from the light of day;
(With God knows, too, how many more,
For whom that doom is yet in store)--
Of Rectors cruelly compelled
  From Bath and Cheltenham to haste home,
Because the tithes, by Pat withheld,
 Will _not_ to Bath or Cheltenham come;
Nor will the flocks consent to pay
Their parsons thus to stay away;--
Tho' with _such_ parsons, one may doubt
If 'tisn't money well laid out;--
Of all, in short, and each degree
Of that once happy Hierarchy,
  Which used to roll in wealth so pleasantly;
But now, alas! is doomed to see
Its surplus brought to nonplus presently!

Such are the themes this man of pathos,
Priest of prose and lord of bathos,
Will preach and preach t'ye, till you're dull again;
Then, hail him, Saints, with joint acclaim,
Shout to the stars his tuneful name,
Which Murtagh _was_, ere known to fame,
But now is _Mortimer_ O'Mulligan!

All true, Dick, true as you're alive--
I've seen him, some hours since, arrive.
Murtagh is come, the great Itinerant--
And Tuesday, in the market-place,
Intends, to every saint and sinner in't,
  To state what _he_ calls Ireland's Case;
Meaning thereby the case of _his_ shop,-
Of curate, vicar, rector, bishop,
And all those other grades seraphic,
That make men's souls their special traffic,
Tho' caring not a pin _which_ way
The erratic souls go, so they _pay_.--
Just as some roguish country nurse,
  Who takes a foundling babe to suckle,
First pops the payment in her purse,
  Then leaves poor dear to--suck its knuckle:
Even so these reverend rigmaroles
Pocket the money--starve the souls.
Murtagh, however, in his glory,
Will tell, next week, a different story;
Will make out all these men of barter,
As each a saint, a downright martyr,
Brought to the _stake_--i.e. a _beef_ one,
Of all their martyrdoms the chief one;
Tho' try them even at this, they'll bear it,
If tender and washt down with claret.

Meanwhile Miss Fudge, who loves all lions.
Your saintly, _next_ to great and high 'uns--
(A Viscount, be he what he may,
Would cut a Saint out any day,)
Has just announced a godly rout,
Where Murtagh's to be first brought out,
And shown in his tame, _week-day_ state:--
"Prayers, half-past seven, tea at eight."
Even so the circular missive orders--
Pink cards, with cherubs round the borders.

Haste, Dick--you're lost, if you lose time;--
  Spinsters at forty-five grow giddy,
And Murtagh with his tropes sublime
  Will surely carry off old Biddy,
Unless some spark at once propose,
And distance him by downright prose.
That sick, rich squire, whose wealth and lands
All pass, they say, to Biddy's hands,
(The patron, Dick, of three fat rectories!)
Is dying of _angina pectoris_;--
So that, unless you're stirring soon.
  Murtagh, that priest of puff and pelf,
May come in for a honey-_moon_,
  And be the _man_ of it, himself!

As for _me_, Dick--'tis whim, 'tis folly,
But this young niece absorbs me wholly.
'Tis true, the girl's a vile verse-maker--
  Would rhyme all nature, if you'd let her;--
But even her oddities, plague take her,
  But made me love her all the better.
_Too_ true it is, she's bitten sadly
With this new rage for rhyming badly,
Which late hath seized all ranks and classes,
Down to that new Estate, "the masses ";
  Till one pursuit all tastes combines--
One common railroad o'er Parnassus,
Where, sliding in those tuneful grooves,
Called couplets, all creation moves,
  And the whole world runs mad _in lines_.
Add to all this--what's even still worse,
As rhyme itself, tho' still a curse,
Sounds better to a chinking purse--
Scarce sixpence hath my charmer got,
While I can muster just a groat;
So that, computing self and Venus,
Tenpence would clear the amount between us.
However, things may yet prove better:--
Meantime, what awful length of letter!
And how, while heaping thus with gibes
The Pegasus of modern scribes,
My own small hobby of farrago
Hath beat the pace at which even _they_ go!


[1] "Our anxious desire is to be found on the side of the Lord."--_Record
Newspaper_.






LETTER V.

FROM LARRY O'BRANIGAN, IN ENGLAND, TO HIS WIFE JUDY, AT MULLINAFAD.


Dear Judy, I sind you this bit of a letther,
By mail-coach conveyance--for want of a betther--
To tell you what luck in this world I have had
Since I left the sweet cabin, at Mullinafad.
Och, Judy, that night!--when the pig which we meant
To dry-nurse in the parlor, to pay off the rent,
Julianna, the craythur--that name was the death of her--[1]
Gave us the shlip and we saw the last breath of her!
And _there_ were the childher, six innocent sowls,
For their nate little play-fellow turning up howls;
While yourself, my dear Judy (tho' grievin's a folly),
Stud over Julianna's remains, melancholy--
Cryin', half for the craythur and half for the money,
"Arrah, why did ye die till we'd sowled you, my honey?"

But God's will be done!--and then, faith, sure enough,
As the pig was desaiced, 'twas high time to be off.
So we gothered up all the poor duds we could catch,
Lock the owld cabin-door, put the kay in the thatch,
Then tuk laave of each other's sweet lips in the dark,
And set off, like the Chrishtians turned out of the Ark;
The six childher with you, my dear Judy, ochone!
And poor I wid myself, left condolin' alone.

How I came to this England, o'er say and o'er lands,
And what cruel hard walkin' I've had on my hands,
Is, at this present writin', too tadious to speak,
So I'll mintion it all in a postscript, next week:--
Only starved I was, surely, as thin as a lath,
Till I came to an up-and-down place they call Bath,
Where, as luck was, I managed to make a meal's meat,
By dhraggin' owld ladies all day thro' the street--
Which their docthors (who pocket, like fun, the pound starlins,)
Have brought into fashion to plase the owld darlins.
Divil a boy in all Bath, tho' _I_ say it, could carry
The grannies up hill half so handy as Larry;
And the higher they lived, like owld crows, in the air,
The more _I_ was wanted to lug them up there.

But luck has two handles, dear Judy, they say,
And mine has _both_ handles put on the wrong way.
For, pondherin', one morn, on a drame I'd just had
Of yourself and the babbies, at Mullinafad,
Och, there came o'er my sinses so plasin' a flutther,
That I spilt an owld Countess right clane in the gutther,
Muff, feathers and all!--the descint was most awful,
And--what was still worse, faith--I knew'twas unlawful:
For, tho', with mere _women_, no very great evil,
'Tupset an owld _Countess_ in Bath is the divil!
So, liftin' the chair, with herself safe upon it,
(for nothin' about her--was _kilt_, but her bonnet,)
Without even mentionin' "By your lave, ma'am,"
I tuk to my heels and--here, Judy, I am!

What's the name of this town I can't say very well,
But your heart sure will jump when you hear what befell
Your own beautiful Larry, the very first day,
(And a Sunday it was, shinin' out mighty gay,)
When his brogues to this city of luck found their way.
Bein' hungry, God help me and happenin' to stop,
Just to dine on the shmell of a pasthry-cook's shop,
I saw, in the window, a large printed paper.
And read there a name, och! that made my heart caper--
Though printed it was in some quare ABC,
That might bother a schoolmaster, let alone _me_.
By gor, you'd have laughed Judy, could you've but listened,
As, doubtin', I cried, "why is it!--no, it _isn't_:"
But it _was_, after all--for, by spellin' quite slow,
First I made out "Rev. Mortimer"--then a great "O";
And, at last, by hard readin' and rackin' my skull again,
Out it came, nate as imported, "O'Mulligan!"

Up I jumpt like a sky-lark, my jewel, at that name,--
Divil a doubt on my mind, but it _must_ be the same
"Master Murthagh, himself," says I, "all the world over!
My own fosther-brother--by jinks, I'm in clover.
Tho' _there_, in the play-bill, he figures so grand,
One wet-nurse it was brought us both up by hand,
And he'll not let me shtarve in the inemy's land!"

Well, to make a long hishtory short, niver doubt
But I managed, in no time, to find the lad out:
And the joy of the meetin' bethuxt him and me,
Such a pair of owld cumrogues--was charmin' to see.
Nor is Murthagh less plased with the evint than _I_ am,
As he just then was wanting a Valley-de-sham;
And, for _dressin'_ a gintleman, one way or t'other,
Your nate Irish lad is beyant every other.

But now, Judy, comes the quare part of the case;
And, in throth, it's the only drawback on my place.
'Twas Murthagh's ill luck to be crost, as you know,
With an awkward mishfortune some short time ago;
That's to say, he turned Protestant--_why_, I can'tlarn;
But, of coorse, he knew best, an' it's not _my_ consarn.
All I know is, we both were good Catholics, at nurse,
And myself am so still--nayther better not worse.
Well, our bargain was all right and tight in a jiffy,
And lads more contint never yet left, the Liffey,
When Murthagh--or Morthimer, as he's _now_ chrishened,
His _name_ being convarted, at laist, if _he_ isn't--
Lookin' sly at me (faith, 'twas divartin' to see)
"_Of coorse_, you're a Protestant, Larry," says he.
Upon which says myself, wid a wink just as shly,
"Is't a Protestant?--oh yes, _I am_, sir," says I;--
And there the chat ended, and divil a more word
Controvarsial between us has since then occurred.

What Murthagh could mane, and, in troth, Judy dear,
What _I myself_ meant, doesn'tseem mighty clear;
But the truth is, tho' still for the Owld Light a stickler,
I was just then too shtarved to be over partic'lar:--
And, God knows, between us, a comic'ler pair
Of twin Protestants couldn't be seen _any_ where.

Next Tuesday (as towld in the play-bills I mintioned,
Addrest to the loyal and godly intintioned,)
His Riverence, my master, comes forward to preach,--
Myself doesn'tknow whether sarmon or speech,
But it's all one to him, he's a dead hand at each;
Like us Paddys in gin'ral, whose skill in orations
Quite bothers the blarney of all other nations.

But, whisht!--there's his Riverence, shoutin' out "Larry,"
And sorra a word more will this shmall paper carry;
So, here, Judy, ends my short bit of a letther,
Which, faix, I'd have made a much bigger and betther.
But divil a one Post-office hole in this town
Fit to swallow a dacent sized billy-dux down.
So good luck to the childer!--tell Molly, I love her;
Kiss Oonagh's sweet mouth, and kiss Katty all over--
Not forgettin' the mark of the red-currant whiskey
She got at the fair when yourself was so frisky.
The heavens be your bed!--I will write, when I can again,
Yours to the world's end,

LARRY O'BRANIGAN.


[1] The Irish peasantry are very fond of giving fine names to their pigs.
I have heard of one instance in which a couple of young pigs were named,
at their birth, Abelard and Eloisa.






LETTER VI.

FROM MISS BIDDY FUDGE, TO MRS. ELIZABETH ----.


How I grieve you're not with us!--pray, come, if you can,
Ere we're robbed of this dear, oratorical man,
Who combines in himself all the multiple glory
Of, Orangeman, Saint, _quondam_ Papist and Tory;--
(Choice mixture! like that from which, duly confounded,
The best sort of _brass_ was, in old times, compounded.)--
The sly and the saintly, the worldly and godly,
All fused down, in brogue so deliciously oddly!
In short, he's a _dear_--and _such_ audiences draws,
Such loud peals of laughter and shouts of applause,
As _can't_ but do good to the Protestant cause.

Poor dear Irish Church!--he today sketched a view
Of her history and prospect, to _me_ at least new,
And which (if it _takes_ as it ought) must arouse
The whole Christian world her just rights to espouse.
As to _reasoning_--you know, dear, that's now of no use,
People still will their _facts_ and dry _figures_ produce,
As if saving the souls of a Protestant flock were
A thing to be managed "according to Cocker!"
In vain do we say, (when rude radicals hector
At paying some thousands a year to a Rector,
In places where Protestants _never yet were_,)
"Who knows but young Protestants _may_ be born there?"
And granting such accident, think, what a shame,
If they didnt find Rector and Clerk when they came!
It is clear that, without such a staff on full pay,
These little Church embryos _must_ go astray;
And, while fools are computing what Parsons would cost,
Precious souls are meanwhile to the Establishment lost!

In vain do we put the case sensibly thus;--
They'll still with their figures and facts make a fuss,
And ask "if, while all, choosing each his own road,
Journey on, as we can, towards the Heavenly Abode,
It is right that _seven_ eighths of the travellers should pay
For _one_ eighth that goes quite a different way?"--
Just as if, foolish people, this wasn't, in reality,
A proof of the Church's extreme liberality,
That tho' hating Popery in _other_ respects,
She to Catholic _money_ in no way objects;
And so liberal her very best Saints, in this sense,
That they even go to heaven at the Catholic's expense.

But tho' clear to _our_ minds all these arguments be,
People cannot or _will_ not their cogency see;
And I grieve to confess, did the poor Irish Church
Stand on reasoning alone, she'd be left in the lurch.
It was therefore, dear Lizzy, with joy most sincere,
That I heard this nice Reverend O'_something_ we've here,
Produce, from the depths of his knowledge and reading,
A view of that marvellous Church, far exceeding,
In novelty, force, and profoundness of thought,
All that Irving himself in his glory e'er taught.

Looking thro' the whole history, present and past,
Of the Irish Law Church, from the first to the last;
Considering how strange its original birth--
Such a thing having _never_ before been on earth--
How opposed to the instinct, the law and the force
Of nature and reason has been its whole course;
Thro' centuries encountering repugnance, resistance,
Scorn, hate, execration--yet still in existence!
Considering all this, the conclusion he draws
Is that Nature exempts this one Church from her laws--
That Reason, dumb-foundered, gives up the dispute,
And before the portentous anomaly stands mute;
That in short 'tis a Miracle! and, _once_ begun,
And transmitted thro' ages, from father to son,
For the honor of miracles, _ought to go on_.

Never yet was conclusion so cogent and sound,
Or so fitted the Church's weak foes to confound.
For observe the more low all her merits they place,
The more they make out the miraculous case,
And the more all good Christians must deem it profane
To disturb such a prodigy's marvellous reign.

As for scriptural proofs, he quite placed beyond doubt
That the whole in the Apocalypse may be found out,
As clear and well-proved, he would venture to swear,
As anything else has been _ever_ found there:--
While the mode in which, bless the dear fellow, he deals
With that whole lot of vials and trumpets and seals,
And the ease with which vial on vial he strings,
Shows him quite a _first-rate_ at all these sort of things.

So much for theology:--as for the affairs
Of this temporal world--the light drawing-room cares
And gay toils of the toilet, which, God knows, I seek,
From no love of such things, but in humbleness meek,
And to be, as the Apostle, was, "weak with the weak,"
Thou wilt find quite enough (till I'm somewhat less busy)
In the extracts inclosed, my dear news-loving Lizzy.

EXTRACTS FROM MY DIARY.

_Thursday_.

Last night, having naught more holy to do,
Wrote a letter to dear Sir Andrew Agnew,
About the "Do-nothing-on-Sunday-club,"
Which we wish by some shorter name to dub:--
As the use of more vowels and Consonants
Than a Christian on Sunday _really_ wants,
Is a grievance that ought to be done away,
And the Alphabet left to rest, that day.

_Sunday_.

Sir Andrew's answer!--but, shocking to say,
Being franked unthinkingly yesterday.
To the horror of Agnews yet unborn,
It arrived on this blessed Sunday morn!!--
How shocking!--the postman's self cried "shame on't,"
Seeing the immaculate Andrew's name on't!!
What will the Club do?--meet, no doubt.
'Tis a matter that touches the Class Devout,
And the friends of the Sabbath _must_ speak out.

_Tuesday_.

Saw to-day, at the raffle--and saw it with pain--
That those stylish Fitzwigrams begin to dress plain.
Even gay little Sophy smart trimmings renounces--
She who long has stood by me thro' all sorts of flounces,
And showed by upholding the toilet's sweet rites,
That we girls may be Christians without being frights.
This, I own, much alarms me; for tho' one's religious,
And strict and--all that, there's no need to be hideous;
And why a nice bonnet should stand in the way
Of one's going to heaven, 'tisn't easy to say.

Then, there's Gimp, the poor thing--if her custom we drop,
Pray what's to become of her soul and her shop?
If by saints like ourselves no more orders are given,
She'll lose all the interest she now takes in heaven;
And this nice little "fire-brand, pluckt from the burning,"
May fall in again at the very next turning.

_Wednesday_.

_Mem_.--To write to the India Mission Society;
And send 20--heavy tax upon piety!

Of all Indian luxuries we now-a-days boast,
Making "Company's Christians" perhaps costs the most.
And the worst of it is, that these converts full grown,
Having lived in _our_ faith mostly die in their _own_,[1]
Praying hard, at the last, to some god who, they say,
When incarnate on earth, used to steal curds and whey.[2]
Think, how horrid, my dear!--so that all's thrown away;
And (what is still worse) for the rum and the rice
They consumed, while believers, we saints pay the price.

Still 'tis cheering to find that we _do_ save a few--
The Report gives six Christians for Cunnangcadoo;
Doorkotchum reckons seven, and four Trevandrum,
While but one and a half's left at Cooroopadum.
In this last-mentioned place 'tis the barbers enslave 'em,
For once they turn Christians no barber will shave 'em.[3]

To atone for this rather small Heathen amount,
Some Papists, turned Christians,[4] are tackt to the account.
And tho' to catch Papists, one needn't go so far,
Such fish are worth hooking, wherever they are;
And _now_, when so great of such converts the lack is,
_One_ Papist well caught is worth millions of Blackies.

_Friday_.

Last night had a dream so odd and funny,
  I cannot resist recording it here.--
Methought that the Genius of Matrimony
  Before me stood with a joyous leer,
Leading a husband in each hand,
  And both for _me_, which lookt rather queer;--
_One_ I could perfectly understand,
But why there were _two_ wasnt quite so clear.
T'was meant however, I soon could see,
  To afford me a _choice_--a most excellent plan;
And--who should this brace of candidates be,
  But Messrs. O'Mulligan and Magan:--
A thing, I suppose, unheard of till then,
To dream, at once, of _two_ Irishmen!--
That handsome Magan, too, with wings on his shoulders
  (For all this past in the realms of the Blest.)
And quite a creature to dazzle beholders;
  While even O'Mulligan, feathered and drest
  As an elderly cherub, was looking his best.
Ah Liz, you, who know me, scarce can doubt
As to _which_ of the two I singled out.
But--awful to tell--when, all in dread
  Of losing so bright a vision's charms,
I graspt at Magan, his image fled,
Like a mist, away, and I found but the head
  Of O'Mulligan, wings and all, in my arms!
The Angel had flown to some nest divine.
And the elderly Cherub alone was mine!

Heigho!--it is certain that foolish Magan
Either can'tor wont see that he _might_ be the man;
And, perhaps, dear--who knows?--if naught better befall
But--O'Mulligan _may_ be the man, after all.

N. B.

Next week mean to have my first scriptural rout,
For the special discussion of matters devout;--
Like those _soires_, at Powerscourt, so justly renowned,
For the zeal with which doctrine and negus went round;
Those theology-routs which the pious Lord Roden,
That pink of Christianity, first set the mode in;
Where, blessed down-pouring[5]from tea until nine,
The subjects lay all in the Prophecy line;--
Then, supper--and then, if for topics hard driven,
From thence until bed-time to Satan was given;
While Roden, deep read in each topic and tome,
On all subjects (especially the last) was _at home_.


[1] Of such relapses we find innumerable instances in the accounts of the
Missionaries.

[2] The god Krishna, one of the incarnations of the god Vishnu. "One day
[says the Bhagavata] Krishna's playfellows complained to Tasuda that he
had pilfered and ate their curds."

[3] "Roteen wants shaving; but the barber here will not do it. He is run
away lest he should be compelled. He says he will not shave Yesoo Kreest's
people."--_Bapt. Mission Society_, vol. ii., p. 498.

[4] In the Reports of the Missionaries, the Roman Catholics are almost
always classed along with the Heathen.

[5] "About eight o'clock the Lord began to pour down his spirit copiously
upon us--for they had all by this time assembled in my room for the
purpose of prayer. This down-pouring continued till about ten o'clock."--
Letter from Mary Campbell to the Rev. John Campbell, of Row, dated
Feruicary, April 4, 1830, giving an account of her "miraculous cure."






LETTER VII.

FROM MISS FANNY FUDGE, TO HER COUSIN, MISS KITTY ----.


IRREGULAR ODE.

Bring me the slumbering souls of flowers,
  While yet, beneath some northern sky,
Ungilt by beams, ungemmed by showers,
They wait the breath of summer hours,
  To wake to light each diamond eye,
  And let loose every florid sigh!

Bring me the first-born ocean waves,
From out those deep primeval caves,
Where from the dawn of Time they've lain--
  THE EMBRYOS OF A FUTURE MAIN!--
Untaught as yet, young things, to speak
  The language of their PARENT SEA
(Polyphlysbaean named, in Greek),
Tho' soon, too soon, in bay and creek,
Round startled isle and wondering peak,
  They'll thunder loud and long as HE!

Bring me, from Hecla's iced abode,
  Young fires--

  I had got, dear, thus far in my ODE
Intending to fill the whole page to the bottom,
  But, having invoked such a lot of fine things,
  Flowers, billows and thunderbolts, rainbows and wings,
Didnt know _what_ to do with 'em, when I had got 'em.
The truth is, my thoughts are too full, at this minute,
  Of Past MSS. any new ones to try.
This very night's coach brings my destiny in it--
  Decides the great question, to live or to die!
And, whether I'm henceforth immortal or no,
All depends on the answer of Simpkins and Co.!

You'll think, love, I rave, so 'tis best to let out
  The whole secret, at once--I have publisht a book!!!
Yes, an actual Book:--if the marvel you doubt,
  You have only in last Monday's _Courier_ to look,
And you'll find "This day publisht by Simpkins and Co.
A Romaunt, in twelve Cantos, entitled 'Woe Woe!'
By Miss Fanny F----, known more commonly so [symbol: hand]."
This I put that my friends mayn't be left in the dark
But may guess at my _writing_ by knowing my _mark_.

How I managed, at last, this great deed to achieve,
Is itself a "Romaunt" which you'd scarce, dear believe;
Nor can I just now, being all in a whirl,
Looking out for the Magnet,[1] explain it, dear girl.
Suffice it to say, that one half the expense
Of this leasehold of fame for long centuries hence--
(Tho' "God knows," as aunt says my humble ambition
Aspires not beyond a small Second Edition)--
One half the whole cost of the paper and printing,
I've managed, to scrape up, this year past, by stinting
My own little wants in gloves, ribands, and shoes,
Thus defrauding the toilet to fit out the Muse!

And who, my dear Kitty; would not do the same?
What's _eau de Cologne_ to the sweet breath of fame?
Yards of riband soon end--but the measures of rhyme,
Dipt in hues of the rainbow, stretch out thro' all time.
Gloves languish and fade away pair after pair,
While couplets shine out, but the brighter for wear,
And the dancing-shoe's gloss in an evening is gone,
While light-footed lyrics thro' ages trip on.

The remaining expense, trouble, risk--and, alas!
My poor copyright too--into other hands pass;
And my friend, the Head Devil of the "_County Gazette_"
(The only Mecaenas I've ever had yet),
He who set up in type my first juvenile lays,
Is now see up by them for the rest of his days;
And while Gods (as my "Heathen Mythology" says)
Live on naught but ambrosia, _his_ lot how much sweeter
To live, lucky devil, on a young lady's metre!

As for _puffing_--that first of all literary boons,
And essential alike both to bards and balloons,
As, unless well supplied with inflation, 'tis found
Neither bards nor balloons budge an inch from the ground;--
In _this_ respect, naught could more prosperous befall;
As my friend (for no less this kind imp can I call)

Knows the whole would of critics--the _hypers_ and all.
I suspect he himself, indeed, dabbles in rhyme,
Which, for imps diabolic, is not the first time;
As I've heard uncle Bob say, 'twas known among Gnostics,
That the Devil on Two Sticks was a devil at Acrostics.

But hark! there's the Magnet just dasht in from Town--
How my heart, Kitty, beats! I shall surely drop down.
That awful _Court Journal, Gazette Athenaeum_,
All full of my book--I shall sink when I see 'em.
And then the great point--whether Simpkins and Co.
Are actually pleased with their bargain or no!--

_Five o'clock_.

All's delightful--such praises!--I really fear
That this poor little head will turn giddy, my dear,
I've but time now to send you two exquisite scraps--
All the rest by the Magnet, on Monday, perhaps.

FROM THE "MORNING POST."

'Tis known that a certain distinguisht physician
  Prescribes, for _dyspepsia_, a course of light reading;
And Rhymes by young Ladies, the first, fresh edition
(Ere critics have injured their powers of nutrition,)
  Are he thinks, for weak stomachs, the best sort of feeding.
Satires irritate--love-songs are found calorific;
But smooth, female sonnets he deems a specific,
And, if taken at bedtime, a sure soporific.
Among works of this kind, the most pleasing we know,
Is a volume just published by Simpkins and Co.,
Where all such ingredients--the flowery, the sweet,
And the gently narcotic--are mixt _per_ receipt,
With a hand so judicious, we've no hesitation
To say that--'bove all, for the young generation--
'Tis an elegant, soothing and safe preparation.

_Nota bene_--for readers, whose object's _to sleep_,
And who read, in their nightcaps, the publishers keep
Good fire-proof binding, which comes very cheap.

ANECDOTE--FROM THE "COURT JOURNAL."

T' other night, at the Countess of ***'s rout,
An amusing event was much whispered about.
It was said that Lord ---, at the Council, that day,
  Had, move than once, jumpt from his seat, like a rocket,
And flown to a corner, where--heedless, they say,
How the country's resources were squandered away--
  He kept reading some papers he'd brought in his pocket.
Some thought them despatches from Spain or the Turk,
  Others swore they brought word we had lost the Mauritius;
But it turned out 'twas only Miss Fudge's new work,
  Which his Lordship devoured with such zeal expeditious--
Messrs. Simpkins and Co., to avoid all delay,
Having sent it in sheets, that his Lordship might say,
He had distanced the whole reading world by a day!


[1] A day-coach of that name.






LETTER VIII.

FROM BOB FUDGE, ESQ., TO THE REV. MORTIMER O'MULLIGAN.


_Tuesday evening_,

I much regret, dear Reverend Sir,
  I could not come to * * * to meet you;
But this curst gout wont let me stir--
  Even now I but by proxy greet you;
As this vile scrawl, whate'er its sense is,
Owes all to an amanuensis.
Most other scourges of disease
Reduce men to _extremities_--
But gout wont leave one even _these_.

From all my sister writes, I see
That you and I will quite agree.
I'm a plain man who speak the truth,
  And trust you'll think me not uncivil,
When I declare that from my youth
  I've wisht your country at the devil:
Nor can I doubt indeed from all
  I've heard of your high patriot fame--
From every word your lips let fall--
  That you most truly wish the same.
It plagues one's life out--thirty years
Have I had dinning in my ears,
  "Ireland wants this and that and t'other,"
And to this hour one nothing hears
  But the same vile, eternal bother.
While, of those countless things she wanted,
Thank God, but little has been granted,
And even that little, if we're men
And Britons, we'll have back again!

I really think that Catholic question
Was what brought on my indigestion;
And still each year, as Popery's curse
Has gathered round us, I've got worse;
Till even my pint of port a day
Cant keep the Pope and bile away.
And whereas, till the Catholic bill,
I never wanted draught or pill,
The settling of that cursed question
Has quite _un_settled my digestion.

Look what has happened since--the Elect
Of all the bores of every sect,
The chosen triers of men's patience,
From all the Three Denominations.
Let loose upon us;--even Quakers
Turned into speechers and lawmakers,
Who'll move no question, stiff-rumpt elves,
Till first the Spirit moves themselves;
And whose shrill Yeas and Nays, in chorus,
Conquering our Ayes and Noes sonorous,
Will soon to death's own slumber snore us.
Then, too, those Jews!--I really sicken
  To think of such abomination;
Fellows, who wont eat ham with chicken,
  To legislate for this great nation!--
Depend upon't, when once they've sway,
  With rich old Goldsmid at the head o' them,
The Excise laws will be done away,
  And _Circumcise_ ones past instead o' them!

In short, dear sir, look where one will,
Things all go on so devilish ill,
That, 'pon my soul, I rather fear
  Our reverend Rector may be right,
Who tells me the Millennium's near;
Nay, swears he knows the very year,
  And regulates his leases by 't;--
Meaning their terms should end, no doubt,
Before the world's own lease is out.
He thinks too that the whole thing's ended
So much more soon than was intended,
Purely to scourge those men of sin
Who brought the accurst Reform Bill in.

However, let's not yet despair;
  Tho' Toryism's eclipst, at present.
And--like myself, in this old chair--
  Sits in a state by no means pleasant;
Feet crippled--hands, in luckless hour,
Disabled of their grasping power;
And all that rampant glee, which revelled
In this world's sweets, be-dulled, be-deviled--

Yet, tho' condemned to frisk no more,
  And both in Chair of Penance set,
There's something tells me, all's not o'er
  With Toryism or Bobby yet;
That tho', between us, I allow
We've not a leg to stand on now;
Tho' curst Reform and _colchicum_
Have made us both look deuced glum,
Yet still, in spite of Grote and Gout,
Again we'll shine triumphant out!

Yes--back again shall come, egad,
_Our_ turn for sport, my reverend lad.
And then, O'Mulligan--oh then,
When mounted on our nags again,
You, on your high-flown Rosinante,
Bedizened out, like Show-Gallantee
(Glitter great from substance scanty);--
While I, Bob Fudge, Esquire, shall ride
Your faithful Sancho, by your side;
Then--talk of tilts and tournaments!
Dam'me, we'll--

       *        *        *        *        *

  'Squire Fudge's clerk presents
To Reverend Sir his compliments;
Is grieved to say an accident
Has just occurred which will prevent
The Squire--tho' now a little better--
From finishing this present letter.
Just when he'd got to "Dam'me, we'll"--
His Honor, full of martial zeal,
Graspt at his crutch, but not being able
  To keep his balance or his hold,
  Tumbled, both self and crutch, and rolled,
Like ball and bat, beneath the table.

All's safe--the table, chair and crutch;--
Nothing, thank God, is broken much,
But the Squire's head, which in the fall
Got bumped considerably--that's all.
At this no great alarm we feel,
As the Squire's head can bear a deal.

_Wednesday morning_

Squire much the same--head rather light--
Raved about "Barbers' Wigs" all night.

Our housekeeper, old Mrs. Griggs,
Suspects that he meant "barbarous Whigs."






LETTER IX.

FROM LARRY O'BRANIGAN, TO HIS WIFE JUDY.


As it was but last week that I sint you a letther,
You'll wondher, dear Judy, what this is about;
And, throth, it's a letther myself would like betther,
Could I manage to lave the contints of it out;
For sure, if it makes even _me_ onaisy,
Who takes things quiet, 'twill dhrive _you_ crazy.

Oh!  Judy, that riverind Murthagh, bad scran to him!
That e'er I should come to've been sarvant-man to him,
Or so far demane the O'Branigan blood,
And my Aunts, the Diluvians (whom not even the Flood
Was able to wash away clane from the earth)[1]
As to sarve one whose name, of mere yestherday's birth,
Can no more to a great O, _before_ it, purtend,
Than mine can to wear a great Q at its _end_.

But that's now all over--last night I gev warnin,'
And, masth'r as he is, will discharge him this mornin'.
The thief of the world!--but it's no use balraggin'[2]--
All I know is, I'd fifty times rather be draggin'
Ould ladies up hill to the ind of my days,

Than with Murthagh to rowl in a chaise, at my aise,
And be forced to discind thro' the same dirty ways.
Arrah, sure, if I'd heerd where he last showed his phiz,
I'd have known what a quare sort of monsthsr he is;
For, by gor, 'twas at Exether Change, sure enough,
That himself and his other wild Irish showed off;
And it's pity, so 'tis, that they hadn't got no man
Who knew the wild crathurs to act as their showman--
Sayin', "Ladies and Gintlemen, plaze to take notice,
"How shlim and how shleek this black animal's coat is;
"All by raison, we're towld, that the natur o' the baste
"Is to change its coat _once_ in its lifetime, _at laste_;
"And such objiks, in _our_ counthry, not bein' common ones,
"Are _bought up_, as this was, by way of Fine Nomenons.
"In regard of its _name_--why, in throth, I'm consarned
"To differ on this point so much with the Larned,
"Who call it a '_Morthimer_,' whereas the craythur
"Is plainly a 'Murthagh,' by name and by nathur."

This is how I'd have towld them the righst of it all.
Had _I_ been their showman at Exether Hail--
Not forgettin' that other great wondher of Airin
(Of the owld bitther breed which they call Prosbetairin),
The famed Daddy Coke--who, by gor, I'd have shown 'em
As proof how such bastes may be tamed, when you've thrown 'em
A good frindly sop of the rale _Raigin Donem_.[3]
But throth, I've no laisure just now, Judy dear,
For anything, barrin' our own doings here,
And the cursin' and dammin' and thund'rin like mad,
We Papists, God help us, from Murthagh have had.
He says we're all murtherers--divil a bit less--
And that even our priests, when we go to confess,
Give us lessons in murthering and wish us success!

When axed how he daared, by tongue or by pen,
To belie, in this way, seven millions of men,
Faith, he said'twas all towld him by Docthor Den![4]
"And who the divil's _he_?" was the question that flew
From Chrishtian to Chrishtian--but not a sowl knew.
While on went Murthagh, in iligant style,
Blasphaming us Cath'lics all the while,
As a pack of desaivers, parjurers, villains,
All the whole kit of the aforesaid millions;--
Yourself, dear Judy, as well as the rest,
And the innocent craythur that's at your breast,
All rogues together, in word and deed,
Owld Den our insthructor and Sin our creed!

When axed for his proofs again and again,
Divil an answer he'd give but Docthor Den.
Couldn'the call into coort some _livin'_ men?
"No, thank you"--he'd stick to Docthor Den--
An ould gintleman dead a century or two,
Who all about _us_, live Catholics, knew;
And of coorse was more handy, to call in a hurry,
Than Docthor MacHale or Docthor Murray!

But, throth, it's no case to be jokin' upon,
Tho' myself, from bad habits, is _makin'_ it one.
Even _you_, had you witnessed his grand climactherics,
Which actially threw one owld maid in hysterics--
Or, och! had you heerd such a purty remark as his,
That Papists are only "_Humanity's carcasses_,
"_Risen_"--but, by dad, I'm afeared I can't give it ye--
"_Risen from the sepulchre of--inactivity_;
"_And, like owld corpses, dug up from antikity_,
"_Wandrin' about in all sorts of inikity_!!"--[5]
Even you, Judy, true as you are to the Owld Light,
Would have laught, out and out, at this iligant flight
Of that figure of speech called the Blatherumskite.
As for me, tho' a funny thought now and then came to me,
Rage got the betther at last--and small blame to me,
So, slapping my thigh, "by the Powers of Delf,"
Says I bowldly "I'll make a noration myself."
And with that up I jumps--but, my darlint, the minit
I cockt up my head, divil a sinse remained in it.
Tho', _saited_, I could have got beautiful on,
When I tuk to my legs, faith, the gab was all gone:--
Which was odd, for us, Pats, who, whate'er we've a hand in,
At laste in our _legs_ show a sthrong understandin'.

Howsumdever, detarmined the chaps should pursaive
What I thought of their doin's, before I tuk lave,
"In regard of all that," says I--there I stopt short--
Not a word more would come, tho' I shtruggled hard for't.
So, shnapping my fingers at what's called the Chair,
And the owld Lord (or Lady, I believe) that sat there--
"In regard of all that," says I bowldly again--
"To owld Nick I pitch Mortimer--_and_ Docthor Den";--
Upon which the whole company cried out "Amen";
And myself was in hopes 'twas to what _I_ had said,
But, by gor, no such thing--they were not so well bred:
For, 'twas all to a prayer Murthagh just had read out,
By way of fit finish to job so devout:
That is--_afther_ well damning one half the community,
To pray God to keep all in pace an' in unity!

This is all I can shtuff in this letter, tho' plinty
Of news, faith, I've got to fill more--if 'twas twinty.
But I'll add, on the _outside_, a line, should I need it,
(Writin' "Private" upon it, that no one may read it,)
To tell you how _Mortimer_ (as the Saints chrishten him)
Bears the big shame of his sarvant's dismisshin' him.

(_Private outside_.)

Just come from his riv'rence--the job is all done--
By the powers, I've discharged him as sure as a gun!
And now, Judy dear, what on earth I'm to do
With myself and my appetite--both good as new--
Without even a single traneen in my pocket,
Let alone a good, dacent pound--starlin', to stock it--
Is a mysht'ry I lave to the One that's above,
Who takes care of us, dissolute sawls, when hard dhrove!


[1] "I am of your Patriarchs, I, a branch of one of your antediluvian
families--fellows that the Flood could not wash away."--CONGREVE, "_Love
for Love_."

[2] To _balrag_ is to abuse--Mr. Lover makes it _ballyrag_, and
he is high authority: but if I remember rightly, Curran in his national
stories used to employ the word as above.--See Lover's most amusing and
genuinely Irish work, the "Legends and Stories of Ireland."

[3] Larry evidently means the _Regium Donum_;--a sum contributed by
the government annually to the support of the Presbyterian churches in
Ireland.

[4]Correctly, Dens--Larry not being very particular in his nomenclature.

[5] "But she (Popery) is no longer _the tenant of the sepulchre of
inactivity_. She has come from the burial-place, walking forth a monster,
as if the spirit of evil had corrupted _the carcass of her departed
humanity_; noxious and noisome an object of abhorrence and dismay to all
who are not _leagued with her in iniquity_."--Report of the Rev.
Gentleman's Speech, June 20, in the Record Newspaper.






LETTER X.

FROM THE REV. MORTIMER O'MULLIGAN, TO THE REV. ----.


These few brief lines, my reverend friend,
By a safe, private hand I send
(Fearing lest some low Catholic wag
Should pry into the Letter-bag),
To tell you, far as pen can dare
How we, poor errant martyrs, fare;--
Martyrs, not quite to fire and rack,
As Saints were, some few ages back.
But--scarce less trying in its way--
To laughter, wheresoe'er we stray;
To jokes, which Providence mysterious
Permits on men and things so serious,
Lowering the Church still more each minute,
And--injuring our preferment in it.

Just think, how worrying 'tis, my friend,
To find, where'er our footsteps bend,
  Small jokes, like squibs, around us whizzing;
And bear the eternal torturing play
Of that great engine of our day,
  Unknown to the Inquisition--quizzing!
Your men of thumb-screws and of racks
Aimed at the _body_ their attack;
But modern torturers, more refined,
Work _their_ machinery on the _mind_.
Had St. Sebastian had the luck
  With me to be a godly rover,
Instead of arrows, he'd be stuck
  With stings of ridicule all over;
And poor St. Lawrence who was killed
By being on a gridiron grilled,
Had he but shared _my_ errant lot,
Instead of grill on gridiron hot,
A _moral_ roasting would have got.

Nor should I (trying as all this is)
  Much heed the suffering or the shame--
As, like an actor, _used_ to hisses,
  I long have known no other fame,
But that (as I may own to _you_,
Tho' to the _world_ it would not do,)
No hope appears of fortune's beams
Shining on _any_ of my schemes;
No chance of something more _per ann_,
As supplement to Kellyman;
No prospect that, by fierce abuse
Of Ireland, I shall e'er induce
The rulers of this thinking nation
To rid us of Emancipation:
To forge anew the severed chain,
And bring back Penal Laws again.

Ah happy time! when wolves and priests
Alike were hunted, as wild beasts;
And five pounds was the price, _per_ head,
For bagging _either_, live or dead;--[1]
Tho' oft, we're told, _one_ outlawed brother
Saved cost, by eating up _the other_,
Finding thus all those schemes and hopes
I built upon my flowers and tropes
    All scattered, one by one, away,
As flashy and unsound as they,
The question comes--what's to be done?
And there's but one course left me--_one_.
Heroes, when tired of war's alarms,
Seek sweet repose in Beauty's arms.
The weary Day-God's last retreat is
The breast of silvery-footed Thetis;
And mine, as mighty Love's my judge,
Shall be the arms of rich Miss Fudge!

Start not, my friend,--the tender scheme,
Wild and romantic tho' it seem,
Beyond a parson's fondest dream,
Yet shines, too, with those golden dyes,
So pleasing to a parson's eyes
That only _gilding_ which the Muse
Can not around _her_ sons diffuse:--
Which, whencesoever flows its bliss,
From wealthy Miss or benefice,
To Mortimer indifferent is,
So he can only make it _his_.
There is but one slight damp I see
Upon this scheme's felicity,
And that is, the fair heroine's claim
That I shall take _her_ family name.
To this (tho' it may look henpeckt),
I cant quite decently object,
Having myself long chosen to shine
Conspicuous in the _alias_[2] line;
So that henceforth, by wife's decree,
  (For Biddy from this point wont budge)
Your old friend's new address must be
  The _Rev. Mortimer O'Fudge_--
The "O" being kept, that all may see
We're _both_ of ancient family.

Such, friend, nor need the fact amaze you,
My public life's a calm Euthanasia.
Thus bid I long farewell to all
The freaks of Exeter's old Hall--
Freaks, in grimace, its apes exceeding,
And rivalling its bears in breeding.
Farewell, the platform filled with preachers--
The prayer given out, as grace, by speechers,
Ere they cut up their fellow-creatures:--
Farewell to dead old Dens's volumes,
And, scarce less dead, old _Standard's_ columns:--
From each and all I now retire,
My task, henceforth, as spouse and sire,
To bring up little filial Fudges,
To be M.P.s, and Peers, and Judges--
_Parsons_ I'd add too, if alas!
There yet were hope the Church could pass
The gulf now oped for hers and her,
Or long survive what _Exeter_--
Both Hall and Bishop, of that name--
Have done to sink her reverend fame.
Adieu, dear friend--you'll oft hear _from_ me,
  Now I'm no more a travelling drudge;
  Meanwhile I sign (that you may judge
How well the surname will become me)
    Yours truly,
      MORTIMER O'FUDGE.


[1] "Among other amiable enactments against the Catholics at this period
(1649), the price of five pounds was set on the head of a Romish
priest--being exactly the same sum offered by the same legislators for the
head of a wolf."--_Memoirs of Captain Rock_, book i., chap. 10.

[2] In the first edition of his Dictionary, Dr. Johnson very significantly
exemplified the meaning of the word "alias" by the instance of Mallet, the
poet, who had exchanged for this more refined name his original Scotch
patronymic, Malloch. "What _other_ proofs he gave [says Johnson] of
disrespect to his native country, I know not; but it was remarked of him
that he was the only Scot whom Scotchmen did not commend."--_Life of
Mallet_.






LETTER XI.

FROM PATRICK MAGAN, ESQ.,
TO THE REV. RICHARD ----.
------, IRELAND.


Dear Dick--just arrived at my own humble_gte_,
I enclose you, post-haste, the account, all complete,
Just arrived, _per_ express, of our late noble feat.

   [_Extract from the "County Gazette."_]

This place is getting gay and full again.

      *        *        *        *        *

  Last week was married, "in the Lord,"
The Reverend Mortimer O'Mulligan,
  Preacher, in _Irish_, of the Word,
He, who the Lord's force lately led on--
(Exeter Hall his _Armagh_-geddon,)[1]
To Miss B. Fudge of Pisgah Place,
One of the chosen, as "heir of grace,"
And likewise heiress of Phil. Fudge,
Esquire, defunct, of Orange Lodge.

Same evening, Miss F. Fudge, 'tis hinted--
  Niece of the above, (whose "Sylvan Lyre,"
In our _Gazette_, last week, we printed).
  Eloped with Pat. Magan, Esquire.
The fugitives were trackt some time,
  After they'd left the Aunt's abode,
By scraps of paper scrawled with rhyme,
  Found strewed along the Western road;--
Some of them, _ci-devant_ curlpapers,
Others, half burnt in lighting tapers.
This clew, however, to their flight,
  After some miles was seen no more;
And, from inquiries made last night,
  We find they've reached the Irish shore.

Every word of it true, Dick--the escape from Aunt's thrall--
Western road--lyric fragments--curl-papers and all.
My sole stipulation, ere linkt at the shrine
(As some balance between Fanny's numbers and mine),
Was that, when we were _one_, she must give up the _Nine_;
Nay, devote to the Gods her whole stock of MS.
With a vow never more against prose to transgress.
This she did, like a heroine;--smack went to bits
The whole produce sublime of her dear little wits--
Sonnets, elegies, epigrams, odes canzonets--
Some twisted up neatly, to form _allumettes_,
Some turned into _papillotes_, worthy to rise
And enwreathe Berenice's bright locks in the skies!
While the rest, honest Larry (who's now in my pay),
Begged, as "lover of _po'thry_," to read on the way.

Having thus of life's _poetry_ dared to dispose,
How we now, Dick, shall manage to get thro' its _prose_,
With such slender materials for _style_, Heaven knows!
But--I'm called off abruptly--_another_ Express!
What the deuce can it mean?--I'm alarmed, I confess.

P.S.

Hurrah, Dick, hurrah, Dick, ten thousand hurrahs!
I'm a happy, rich dog to the end of my days.
There--read the good news--and while glad, for _my_ sake,
That Wealth should thus follow in Love's shining wake,
Admire also the _moral_--that he, the sly elf,
Who has fudged all the world, should be now fudged _himself_!

EXTRACT FROM LETTER ENCLOSED.

With pain the mournful news I write,
Miss Fudge's uncle died last night;
And much to mine and friends' surprise,
By will doth all his wealth devise--
Lands, dwellings--rectories likewise--
To his "beloved grand-niece," Miss Fanny,
Leaving Miss Fudge herself, who many
Long years hath waited--not a penny!
Have notified the same to latter,
And wait instructions in the matter.
  For self and partners, etc.


[1] The rectory which the Rev. gentleman holds is situated in the county
of _Armagh_!--a most remarkable coincidence--and well worthy of the
attention of certain expounders of the Apocalypse.

[Illustration: Thomas Moore]
